Madam Speaker,
I rise to present the Budget of the Union for the year 2015-16.
2.
I present this Budget in an economic environment which is far more
positive than in the recent past. When other economies are facing serious
challenges, India is about to take-off on a faster growth trajectory once again.
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) has downgraded its earlier forecast of
global economic growth by 0.3%, and the World Trade Organization has revised
its forecast of world trade growth from 5.3% to 4%. Forecasts for India, however,
have either been upgraded, or remained the same, without downgrades. Madam
Speaker, we have also embraced the States as equal partners in the process of
economic growth. States have been economically empowered more than ever
before and it is my belief that every rupee of public expenditure, whether
undertaken by the Centre or the States, will contribute to the betterment of people’s
lives through job creation, poverty elimination and economic growth.
3.
In the last nine months, the NDA Government headed by Prime Minister
Shri Narendra Modi, has undertaken several significant steps to energise the
economy. The credibility of the Indian economy has been re-established. The
world is predicting that it is India’s chance to fly.
Kuch to phool khilaye humne, aur kuch phool khilane hai
Mushkil yeh hai bag me ab tak, kaante kai purane hai
4.
Though the Union Budget is essentially a Statement of Account of public
finances, it has historically become a significant opportunity to indicate the
direction and the pace of India’s economic policy. My proposals, therefore, lay
out the roadmap for accelerating growth, enhancing investment and passing on
the benefit of the growth process to the common man, woman, youth and child:
those, whose quality of life needs to be improved. This is the path which we will
doggedly and relentlessly pursue. As the Prime Minister has often said, we are a
round-the-clock, round-the-year Government.
5.
Madam, allow me to describe the changes in the Indian economy since
we first took office. In November, 2012, CPI inflation, stood at 11.2%, the
current account deficit by the first quarter of 2013-14 had reached 4.6% of GDP,
and normal foreign inflows until March 2014 were $15 billion. We inherited a
sentiment of, if I may say so, doom and gloom, and the investor community had
almost written us off.
6.
We have come a long way since then. The latest CPI inflation rate is
5.1%, and the wholesale price inflation is negative; the current account deficit
for this year is expected to be below 1.3% of GDP; based on the new series, real
GDP growth is expected to accelerate to 7.4%, making India the fastest growing
large economy in the world; foreign inflows since April 2014 have been about
$55 billion, so that our foreign exchange reserves have increased to a record
$340 billion; the rupee has become stronger by 6.4% against a broad basket of
currencies; and ours was the second-best performing stock market amongst the
major economies. In short, Madam Speaker, we have turned around the economy
dramatically, restoring macro-economic stability and creating the conditions for
sustainable poverty elimination, job creation and durable double-digit economic
growth. Domestic and international investors are seeing us with renewed interest
and hope.
7.
While being mindful of the challenges, Madam Speaker, this gives us
reason to feel optimistic. With all the humility at my command, I submit that this
opportunity has arisen because we have created it. The people of India had voted
resoundingly for quick change, faster growth and highest levels of transparency.
They wanted the scam, scandal and corruption Raj to end. They wanted a
Government in which they can trust. We have lived up to that trust.
8.
Our actions have not been confined to the core or macro-economic areas
alone. Illustratively, action has been taken with regard to allocation of natural
resources; financial inclusion; health and hygiene of the common man; girls and
their education; employment for the youth; improved and non-adversarial tax
administration; effective delivery of benefits; investment and job creation; welfare
of labour; agricultural productivity and increasing farm incomes; power; digital
connectivity; skilling our youth; efficient and better work culture in Government;
ease of doing business; mainstreaming North Eastern States; and, reviving our
pride in the nation and culture. I am giving the details in an Annexure to this
speech.
9.
Madam Speaker, of the work that we have done, I would like to talk of
three achievements as they demonstrate the quality and conviction of our
government. One is the success of the Jan Dhan Yojana. Financial inclusion has
been talked about for decades now. Who would have thought that in a short
period of 100 days, over 12.5 crore families could have been brought into the
financial mainstream? The other is coal auctions. Earlier, the States only got
benefits of royalty. Now, by the transparent auction process that we are carrying
out, the coal bearing States will be getting several lakh of crore of rupees which
they can use for creation of long awaited community assets and for welfare of
their people.
10.
The third is ‘Swachh Bharat’ which we have been able to transform into
a movement to regenerate India. I can speak of, for example, the 50 lakh toilets
already constructed in 2014-15, and I can also assure the Members of this august
House that we will indeed attain the target of building six crore toilets. But,
Madam, Swachh Bharat is not only a programme of hygiene and cleanliness but,
at a deeper level, a programme for preventive health care, and building awareness.
11.
We are now embarked on two more game changing reforms. GST and
what the Economic Survey has called the JAM Trinity – Jan Dhan, Aadhar and
Mobile – to implement direct transfer of benefits. GST will put in place a state-
of-the-art indirect tax system by 1st April, 2016. The JAM Trinity will allow us
to transfer benefits in a leakage-proof, well-targetted and cashless manner.
12.
Madam Speaker, one of the major achievements of my government has
been to conquer inflation. This decline, in my view, represents a structural shift.
Going forward, we expect CPI inflation to remain at close to 5% by the end of
the year. This will allow for further easing of monetary policy.
13.
To ensure that our victory over inflation is institutionalized and hence
continues, we have concluded a Monetary Policy Framework Agreement with
the RBI, as I had promised in my Budget Speech for 2014-15. This Framework
clearly states the objective of keeping inflation below 6%. We will move to
amend the RBI Act this year, to provide for a Monetary Policy Committee.
14.
The Central Statistics Office has recently released a new series for GDP,
which involves a number of changes relative to the old series. Based on the new
series, estimated GDP growth for 2014-15 is 7.4%. Growth in 2015-16 is expected
to be between 8 to 8.5%. Aiming for a double-digit rate seems feasible very
soon.
15.
I now come to the task ahead of us. In respect of social and economic
indicators, for seven decades now, we have worked in terms of percentages, and
numbers of beneficiaries covered. It is quite obvious that incremental change is
not going to take us anywhere. We have to think in terms of a quantum jump.
16.
The year 2022 will be the Amrut Mahotsav, the 75th year, of India’s
independence. The vision of what the Prime Minister has called ‘Team India’,
led by the States and guided by the Central Government, should include:
(i) A roof for each family in India. The call given for ‘Housing for
all’ by 2022 would require Team India to complete 2 crore houses
in urban areas and 4 crore houses in rural areas.
(ii) Each house in the country should have basic facilities of 24-hour
power supply, clean drinking water, a toilet, and be connected to
a road.
(iii) At least one member from each family should have access to the
means for livelihood and, employment or economic opportunity,
to improve his or her lot.
(iv) Substantial reduction of poverty. All our schemes should focus
on and centre around the poor. Each of us has to commit ourselves
to this task of eliminating absolute poverty.
(v) Electrification, by 2020, of the remaining 20,000 villages in the
country, including by off-grid solar power generation.
(vi) Connecting each of the 1,78,000 unconnected habitations by all
weather roads. This will require completing 1,00,000 km of roads
currently under construction plus sanctioning and building another
1,00,000 km of road.
(vii) Good health is a necessity for both quality of life, and a person’s
productivity and ability to support his or her family. Providing
medical services in each village and city is absolutely essential.
(viii) Educating and skilling our youth to enable them to get employment
is the altar before which we must all bow. To ensure that there is
a senior secondary school within 5 km reach of each child, we
need to upgrade over 80,000 secondary schools and add or upgrade
75,000 junior/middle, to the senior secondary level. We also have
to ensure that education improves in terms of quality and learning
outcomes.
(ix) Increase in agricultural productivity and realization of reasonable
prices for agricultural production is essential for the welfare of
rural areas. We should commit to increasing the irrigated area,
improving the efficiency of existing irrigation systems, promoting
agro-based industry for value addition and increasing farm
incomes, and reasonable prices for farm produce.
(x) In terms of communication, the rural and urban divide should no
longer be acceptable to us. We have to ensure connectivity to all
the villages without it.
(xi) Two-thirds of our population is below 35. To ensure that our
young get proper jobs, we have to aim to make India the
manufacturing hub of the world. The Skill India and the Make in
India programmes are aimed at doing this.
(xii) We also have to encourage and grow the spirit of entrepreneurship
in India and support new start-ups. Thus can our youth turn from
being job-seekers, to job-creators.
(xiii) The Eastern and North Eastern regions of our country are lagging
behind in development on many fronts. We need to ensure that
they are on par with the rest of the country.
17.
By the time of the 75th year of Indian independence, Amrut Mahotsav of
our independence is reached, we have to achieve all of the above, so that India
becomes a prosperous country; and a responsible global power. This will be our
true and meaningful tribute to our freedom fighters.
Major Challenges Ahead
18.
As I stated earlier, Madam Speaker, I am also mindful of the five major
challenges I have to reckon with. Firstly, Agricultural incomes are under stress.
Our second challenge is increasing investment in infrastructure. With private
investment in infrastructure via the public private partnership (PPP) model still
weak, public investment needs to step in, to catalyse investment.
19.
Our third major challenge is that manufacturing has declined from 18%
to 17% of GDP as per new GDP data; and manufacturing exports have remained
stagnant at about 10% of GDP. The Make in India programme is aimed at meeting
this challenge, thus creating jobs.
20.
Fourth, we need to be mindful of the need for fiscal discipline in spite of
rising demands for public investment. In keeping with the true spirit of co-
operative federalism, we have devolved a 42% share of the divisible pool of
taxes to States. As members of this august House are aware, this is an
unprecedented increase which would empower states with more resources. The
devolution to the States would be of the order of ` 5.24 lakh crore in 2015-16 as
against the devolution of ` 3.38 lakh crore as per revised estimates of 2014-15.
Another ` 3.04 lakh crore would be transferred by way of grants and plan transfers.
Thus, total transfer to the States will be about 62% of the total tax receipts of the
country.
21.
In spite of the consequential reduced fiscal space for the Centre, the
Government has decided to continue supporting important national priorities
such as agriculture, education, health, MGNREGA, and rural infrastructure
including roads. Programmes targeted for the poor and the under-privileged,
will be continued by us.
22.
With fiscal space not just reduced but squeezed, I have to meet the fifth
challenge of maintaining fiscal discipline. Economic growth this year, at 11.5%,
was lower in nominal terms by about 2%, due to lower inflation. Consequently,
tax buoyancy was also significantly lower. Despite this, Madam, I have kept my
word, and we will meet the challenging fiscal deficit target of 4.1% of GDP, that
we had inherited. Madam Speaker, I need to overcome these challenges to reduce
and eliminate poverty.
Fiscal Roadmap
23.
I want to underscore that my government still remains firm on achieving
the medium term target of 3% of GDP. But that journey has to take account of
the need to increase public investment. The total additional public investment
over and above the RE is planned to be ` 1.25 lakh crore out of which ` 70,000
crore would be capital expenditure from budgetary outlays. We also have to
take into account the drastically reduced fiscal space; uncertainties that
implementation of GST will create; and the likely burden from the report of the
7th Pay Commission. Rushing into, or insisting on, a pre-set time-table for
fiscal consolidation pro-cyclically would, in my opinion, not be pro-growth. With
the economy improving, the pressure for accelerated fiscal consolidation too has
decreased. In these circumstances, I will complete the journey to a fiscal deficit
of 3% in 3 years, rather than the two years envisaged previously. Thus, for the
next three years, my targets are: 3.9%, for 2015-16; 3.5% for
2016-17; and, 3.0% for 2017-18. The additional fiscal space will go towards
funding infrastructure investment.
24.
Act.
I am moving amendments accordingly, in the Finance Bill, to the FRBM
25.
Madam Speaker, I want to round up the discussion on the fiscal road
map on an optimistic note. While there is a compositional shift, the aggregate
envelope for job creation, poverty elimination and building infrastructure is not
disturbed; in fact it goes up this year, and every subsequent year, in the same
proportion as the tax revenues of the Union, and the State Governments increase.
From this national perspective of public finances, not only is the path to fiscal
consolidation on track, aggregate annual capital expenditure of the Governments,
as a whole, can be expected to rise significantly, by more than 0.5% of GDP.
26.
Madam Speaker, it may be noted that the budget reflects considerable
scaling up of disinvestment figures. This will include both disinvestment in loss
making units, and some strategic disinvestment.
Good Governance
27.
Madam, Speaker, this Government is committed in its resolve, as Indians,
to regain our pre-eminence as a just and compassionate country. Well-intentioned
schemes introduced in the past, have often been ill-targeted, riddled with leakages
and delivered with inefficiency. The same is true of subsidies. Subsidies are
needed for the poor and those less well off. What we need is a well targeted
system of subsidy delivery. We need to cut subsidy leakages, not subsidies
themselves.We are committed to the process of rationalizing subsidies based on
this approach.
28.
We have embarked on that path. The direct transfer of benefits, started
mostly in scholarship schemes, will be further expanded with a view to increasing
the number of beneficiaries from the present 1 crore to 10.3 crore. Similarly,
` 6,335 crore have so far been transferred directly, as LPG subsidy to 11.5 crore
LPG consumers. I am sure, persons who are better-off, such as those in the top
tax bracket, and those genuinely concerned for the welfare of the poor, such as
members of this House, will give up their LPG subsidy voluntarily.
Agriculture
29.
Our commitment to farmers runs deep. We have already taken major
steps to address the two major factors critical to agricultural production: soil and
water. An ambitious Soil Health Card Scheme has been launched to improve
soil fertility on a sustainable basis. In order to improve soil health, I also propose
to support Agiculture Ministry’s organic farming scheme – “Paramparagat Krishi
Vikas Yojana”. The Pradhanmantri Gram Sinchai Yojana is aimed at irrigating
the field of every farmer and improving water use efficiency to provide `Per
Drop More Crop’. I am allocating ` 5,300 crore to support micro-irrigation,
watershed development and the Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchai Yojana. I urge
the States to chip in substantially in this vital sector.
30.
To support the agriculture sector with the help of effective and hassle-
free agriculture credit, with a special focus on small and marginal farmers,
I propose to allocate ` 25,000 crore in 2015-16 to the corpus of Rural Infrastructure
Development Fund (RIDF) set up in NABARD; ` 15,000 crore for Long Term
Rural Credit Fund; ` 45,000 crore for Short Term Cooperative Rural Credit
Refinance Fund; and ` 15,000 crore for Short Term RRB Refinance Fund.
31.
Farm credit underpins the efforts of our hard-working farmers. I have,
therefore, set up an ambitious target of ` 8.5 lakh crore of credit during the year
2015-16 which, I am sure, the banks will surpass.
32.
Our government is committed to supporting employment through
MGNREGA. We will ensure that no one who is poor is left without employment.
We will focus on improving the quality and effectiveness of activities under
MGNREGA. I have made an initial allocation of ` 34,699 crore for the
programme.
33.
While the farmer is no longer in the clutches of the local trader, his produce
still does not command the best national price. To increase the incomes of farmers,
it is imperative that we create a National agricultural market, which will have
the incidental benefit of moderating price rises. I intend this year to work with
the States, in NITI, for the creation of a Unified National Agriculture Market.
Funding the Unfunded
34.
Madam Speaker, our government firmly believes that development
has to generate inclusive growth. While large corporate and business entities
have a role to play, this has to be complemented by informal sector enterprises
which generate maximum employment. There are some 5.77 crore small business
units, mostly individual proprietorship, which run small manufacturing, trading
or service businesses. 62% of these are owned by SC/ST/OBC. These bottom-
of-the-pyramid, hard-working entrepreneurs find it difficult, if not impossible,
to access formal systems of credit. I, therefore, propose to create a Micro Units
Development Refinance Agency (MUDRA) Bank, with a corpus of ` 20,000
crore, and credit guarantee corpus of ` 3,000 crore. MUDRA Bank will refinance
Micro-Finance Institutions through a Pradhan Mantri Mudra Yojana. In lending,
priority will be given to SC/ST enterprises. These measures will greatly increase
the confidence of young, educated or skilled workers who would now be able to
aspire to become first generation entrepreneurs; existing small businesses, too,
will be able to expand their activities. Just as we are banking the un-banked, we
are also funding the un-funded.
35.
A significant part of the working capital requirement of a MSME arises
due to long receivables realization cycles. We are in the process of establishing
an electronic Trade Receivables Discounting System (TReDS) financing of trade
receivables of MSMEs, from corporate and other buyers, through multiple
financiers. This should improve the liquidity in the MSME sector significantly.
36.
Bankruptcy law reform, that brings about legal certainty and speed, has
been identified as a key priority for improving the ease of doing business. SICA
(Sick Industrial Companies Act) and BIFR (Bureau for Industrial and Financial
Reconstruction) have failed in achieving these objectives. We will bring a
comprehensive Bankruptcy Code in fiscal 2015-16, that will meet global standards
and provide necessary judicial capacity.
37.
The Government is committed to increasing access of the people to the
formal financial system. In this context, Government proposes to utilize the
vast Postal network with nearly 1,54,000 points of presence spread across the
villages of the country. I hope that the Postal Department will make its proposed
Payments Bank venture successful so that it contributes further to the Pradhan
Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana.
38.
To bring parity in regulation of Non-Banking Financial Companies
(NBFCs) with other financial institutions in matters relating to recovery, it is
proposed that NBFCs registered with RBI and having asset size of ` 500 crore
and above will be considered for notifications as ‘Financial Institution’ in terms
of the SARFAESI Act, 2002.
From Jan Dhan to Jan Suraksha
39.
A large proportion of India’s population is without insurance of any kind
- health, accidental or life. Worryingly, as our young population ages, it is also
going to be pension-less. Encouraged by the success of the Pradhan Mantri Jan
Dhan Yojana, I propose to work towards creating a universal social security
system for all Indians, specially the poor and the under-privileged.
40.
The soon-to-be-launched Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Bima Yojna will cover
accidental death risk of ` 2 lakh for a premium of just ` 12 per year. Similarly, we
will also launch the Atal Pension Yojana, which will provide a defined pension,
depending on the contribution, and its period. To encourage people to join this
scheme, the Government will contribute 50% of the beneficiaries’ premium
limited to ` 1,000 each year, for five years, in the new accounts opened before
31st December, 2015.
41.
The third Social Security Scheme that I wish to announce is the Pradhan
Mantri Jeevan Jyoti Bima Yojana which covers both natural and accidental death
risk of ` 2 lakhs. The premium will be ` 330 per year, or less than one rupee per
day, for the age group 18-50.
42.
There are unclaimed deposits of about ` 3,000 crore in the PPF, and
approximately ` 6,000 crore in the EPF corpus. I have proposed the creation of
a Senior Citizen Welfare Fund, in the Finance Bill, for appropriation of these
amounts to a corpus which will be used to subsidize the premiums of vulnerable
groups such as old age pensioners, BPL card-holders, small and marginal farmers
and others. A detailed scheme would be issued in March.
43.
Madam Speaker, special regard needs to be paid to the population of
senior citizens in the country which is now approximately 10.5 crore, out of
which over one crore are above the age of 80 years. 70% live in rural areas and
a large number are in the BPL category. A sizeable percentage of them also
suffer from age related disabilities. Ours is a society that venerates its elders.
I, therefore, propose that a new scheme for providing Physical Aids and Assisted
Living Devices for senior citizens, living below the poverty line.
44.
In sum, these social security schemes reflect our commitment to utilize
the Jan Dhan platform, to ensure that no Indian citizen will have to worry about
illness, accidents, or penury in old age. Being sensitive to the needs of the poor,
under-privileged and the disadvantaged, my Government also remains committed
to the ongoing welfare schemes for the SCs, STs and Women. Despite serious
constraints on Union finances, allocations made this year are as follows:
SC ` 30,851 crore
ST ` 19,980 crore
Women ` 79,258 crore
45.
An integrated education and livelihood scheme called ‘Nai Manzil’ will
be launched this year to enable Minority Youth who do not have a formal school-
leaving certificate to obtain one and find better employment. Further, to show-
case civilization and culture of the Parsis, the Government will support, in
2015-16, an exhibition, ‘The Everlasting Flame’. The allocation for the Ministry
of Minority Affairs is being protected. The BE for the year 2015-16 is ` 3,738
crore.
Infrastructure
46.
Madam, it is no secret that the major slippage in the last decade has been
on the infrastructure front. Our infrastructure does not match our growth
ambitions. There is a pressing need to increase public investment. I have,
therefore, increased outlays on both the roads and the gross budgetary support to
the railways, by ` 14,031 crore, and ` 10,050 crore respectively. The CAPEX of
the public sector units is expected to be ` 3,17,889 crore, an increase of
approximately ` 80,844 crore over RE 2014-15. In fact, all told, investment in
infrastructure will go up by ` 70,000 crore in the year 2015-16, over the year
2014-15 from the Centre’s Funds and resources of CPSEs.
47.
Secondly, I intend to establish a National Investment and Infrastructure
Fund (NIIF), and find monies to ensure an annual flow of ` 20,000 crore to it.
This will enable the Trust to raise debt, and in turn, invest as equity, in
infrastructure finance companies such as the IRFC and NHB. The infrastructure
finance companies can then leverage this extra equity, many fold. Thirdly, I also
intend to permit tax free infrastructure bonds for the projects in the rail, road and
irrigation sectors. Fourth, the PPP mode of infrastructure development has to be
revisited, and revitalised. The major issue involved is rebalancing of risk. In
infrastructure projects, the sovereign will have to bear a major part of the risk
without, of course, absorbing it entirely.
48.
Fifth, I also intend to establish, in NITI, the Atal Innovation Mission
(AIM). AIM will be an Innovation Promotion Platform involving academics,
entrepreneurs, and researchers and draw upon national and international
experiences to foster a culture of innovation, R&D and scientific research in
India. The platform will also promote a network of world-class innovation hubs
and Grand Challenges for India. Initially, a sum of ` 150 crore will be earmarked
for this purpose.
49.
India has a well regarded and world-class IT industry with revenues of
about US$ 150 billion, over US$ 100 billion of exports, employing nearly 40
lakh people directly. We are now seeing a growing interest in start-ups.
Experimenting in cutting edge technologies, creating value out of ideas and
initiatives and converting them into scalable enterprises and businesses is at the
core of our strategy for engaging our youth and for inclusive and sustainable
growth of the country. Concerns such as a more liberal system of raising global
capital, incubation facilities in our Centres of Excellence, funding for seed capital
and growth, and ease of Doing Business etc. need to be addressed to create lakh
of jobs and hundreds of billion dollars in value.
50.
With this objective, Government is establishing a mechanism to be
known as SETU (Self-Employment and Talent Utilisation). SETU will be a
Techno-Financial, Incubation and Facilitation Programme to support all aspects
of start-up businesses, and other self-employment activities, particularly in
technology-driven areas. I am setting aside ` 1,000 crore initially in NITI Aayog
for this purpose.
51.
As the success of so-called minor ports has shown, ports can be an
attractive investment possibility for the private sector. Ports in the public sector
need to both attract such investment as well as leverage the huge land resources
lying unused with them. To enable us to do so, ports in public sector will be
encouraged, to corporatize, and become companies under the Companies Act.
52.
Madam Speaker, investors spend a large amount of time and resources
on getting the multiple permissions required. We aim towards ease of doing in
India. I have myself launched the e-Biz Portal which integrates 14 regulatory
permissions at one source. Good States are embracing and joining this platform.
However, if we really want to create jobs, we have to make India an investment
destination which permits the start of a business in accordance with publically
stated guidelines and criteria.
53.
I intend to appoint an Expert Committee for this purpose to examine the
possibility and prepare a draft legislation where the need for multiple prior
permissions can be replaced with a pre-existing regulatory mechanism.
54.
The Government also proposes to set up 5 new Ultra Mega Power Projects,
each of 4000 MWs in the plug-and-play mode. All clearances and linkages will
be in place before the project is awarded by a transparent auction system. This
should unlock investments to the extent of ` 1 lakh crore. The Government
would also consider similar plug-and-play projects in other infrastructure projects
such as roads, ports, rail lines, airports etc. I am happy to announce that the
second unit of Kudankulam Nuclear Power Station will be commissioned in
2015-16.
55.
Madam Speaker, I hope to garner some additional resources during the
year from tax buoyancy. If I am successful, then over and above the budgetary
allocation, I will endeavour to enhance allocations to MGNREGA by ` 5,000
crore; Integrated Child Development Scheme (ICDS) by ` 1,500 crore; Integrated
Child Protection Scheme (ICPS) by ` 500 crore; and the Prdhan Mantri Krishi
Sinchai Yojana by ` 3,000 crore; and the initial inflow of ` 5,000 crore into the
NIIF.
Financial Markets
56.
One vital factor in promoting investment in India, including in the
infrastructure sector, is the deepening of the Indian Bond market, which we have
to bring at the same level as our world class equity market. I intend to begin this
process this year by setting up a Public Debt Management Agency (PDMA)
which will bring both India’s external borrowings and domestic debt under one
roof.
57.
I also propose to merge the Forwards Markets Commission with SEBI to
strengthen regulation of commodity forward markets and reduce wild speculation.
Enabling legislation, amending the Government Securities Act and the RBI Act
is proposed in the Finance Bill, 2015.
58.
Capital Account Controls is a policy, rather than a regulatory, matter.
I, therefore, propose to amend, through the Finance Bill, Section-6 of FEMA to
clearly provide that control on capital flows as equity will be exercised by the
Government, in consultation with the RBI.
59.
A properly functioning capital market also requires proper consumer
protection. I, therefore, also propose to create a Task Force to establish a sector-
neutral Financial Redressal Agency that will address grievances against all
financial service providers. I am also glad to inform the House that work assigned
to the Task Forces on the Financial Data Management Centre, the Financial
Sector Appellate Tribunal, the Resolution Corporation, and the Public Debt
Management Agency are progressing satisfactorily. We have also received a
large number of suggestions regarding the Indian Financial Code (IFC), which
are currently being reviewed by the Justice Srikrishna Committee. I hope, sooner
rather than later, to introduce the IFC in Parliament for consideration.
60.
Madam, Speaker, this is just the beginning. I have a vision of putting in
place a direct tax regime which is internationally competitive on rates, is without
exemptions, incentivises savings, and does not realize tax from intermediaries.
Such a direct tax regime would match the modernized indirect taxes regime we
are putting in place by way of GST, and will bring both greater transparency and
greater investments.
61.
Madam Speaker the situation with regard to the dormant Employees
Provident Fund (EPF) accounts and the claim ratios of ESIs is too well known to
be repeated here. It has been remarked that both EPF and ESI have hostages,
rather than clients. Further, the low paid worker suffers deductions greater than
the better paid workers, in percentage terms.
62.
With respect to the Employees Provident Fund (EPF), the employee needs
to be provided two options. Firstly, the employee may opt for EPF or the New
Pension Scheme (NPS). Secondly, for employees below a certain threshold of
monthly income, contribution to EPF should be optional, without affecting or
reducing the employer’s contribution. With respect to ESI, the employee should
have the option of choosing either ESI or a Health Insurance product, recognized
by the Insurance Regulatory Development Authority (IRDA). We intend to bring
amending legislation in this regard, after stakeholder consultation.
Monetising Gold
63.
India is one of the largest consumers of gold in the world and imports as
much as 800-1000 tonnes of gold each year. Though stocks of gold in India are
estimated to be over 20,000 tonnes, mostly this gold is neither traded, nor
monetized. I propose to:
(i) Introduce a Gold Monetisation Scheme, which will replace both
the present Gold Deposit and Gold metal Loan Schemes. The new
scheme will allow the depositors of gold to earn interest in their
metal accounts and the jewelers to obtain loans in their metal
account. Banks/other dealers would also be able to monetize this
gold.
(ii) Also develop an alternate financial asset, a Sovereign Gold Bond,
as an alternative to purchasing metal gold. The Bonds will carry a
fixed rate of interest, and also be redeemable in cash in terms of the
face value of the gold, at the time of redemption by the holder of
the Bond.
(iii) Commence work on developing an Indian Gold Coin, which will
carry the Ashok Chakra on its face. Such an Indian Gold Coin
would help reduce the demand for coins minted outside India and
also help to recycle the gold available in the country.
64.
One way to curb the flow of black money is to discourage transactions in
cash. Now that a majority of Indians has or can have, a RUPAY debit card. I,
therefore, proposes to introduce soon several measures that will incentivize
credit or debit card transactions, and disincentivise cash transactions.
Investment
65.
Alternate Investment Funds Regulations have been notified by SEBI.
Such alternate investment funds provide another vehicle for facilitating domestic
investments. Keeping in view the need to increase investments from all sources,
I propose to also allow foreign investments in Alternate Investment Funds.
66.
To further simplify the procedures for Indian Companies to attract foreign
investments, I propose to do away with the distinction between different types of
foreign investments, especially between foreign portfolio investments and foreign
direct investments, and replace them with composite caps The sectors which
are already on a 100% automatic route would not be affected.
67.
The ‘Act East’ policy of the Government of India endeavours to cultivate
extensive economic and strategic relations in South-East Asia. In order to catalyze
investments from the Indian private sector in this region, a Project Development
Company will, through separate Special Purpose Vehicles (SPVs), set up
manufacturing hubs in CMLV countries, namely, Cambodia, Myanmar, Laos
and Vietnam.
Safe India
68.
My Government is committed to safety and security of women. In order
to support programmes for women security, advocacy and awareness, I have
decided to provide another ` 1,000 crore to the Nirbhaya Fund.
Tourism
69.
While India has 25 (twenty five) Cultural World Heritage Sites. These
facilities are still deficient and require restoration, including landscape restoration;
signage and interpretation centres; parking; access for the differently abled;
visitors’ amenities, including securities and toilets; illumination and plans for
benefiting communities around them. I propose to provide resources to start
work along these lines for the following Heritage Sites:
(i) Churches & Convents of Old Goa
(ii) Hampi, Karnataka
(iii) Elephanta Caves, Mumbai
(iv) Kumbalgarh and other Hill Forts of Rajasthan
(v) Rani ki Vav, Patan, Gujarat
(vi) Leh Palace, Ladakh, J&K
(vii) Varanasi Temple town, UP
(viii) Jalianwala bagh, Amritsar, Punjab
(ix)
Qutub Shahi Tombs, Hyderabad, Telengana
70.
After the success of VISAS on arrival issued to travelers of 43 countries,
I propose to increase the countries covered to 150, in stages.
Green India
71.
Madam, as environmental degradation hurts the poor more than others,
we are committed to make our development process as green as possible. Our
de facto ‘Carbon Tax’ on most petroleum products compares favourably with
international norms. With regard to coal, there is a need to find a balance between
taxing pollution, and the price of power. However, beginning this year, I intend
to start on that journey too. My Government is also launching a Scheme for
Faster Adoption and manufacturing of Electric Vehicles (FAME). I am proposing
an initial outlay of ` 75 crore for this Scheme in 2015-16. The Ministry of New
Renewable Energy has revised its target of renewable energy capacity to 1,75,000
MW till 2022, comprising 100,000 MW Solar, 60,000 MW Wind, 10,000 MW
Biomass and 5000 MW Small Hydro.
72.
Madam, Speaker, we are putting the scam, scandal and corruption Raj
behind us. Malfeasance in public procurement can perhaps be contained by
having a procurement law and an institutional structure consistent with the
UNCITRAL model. I believe, Parliament needs to take a view soon on whether
we need a procurement law, and if so, what shape it should take.
73.
On the other hand, disputes arising in public contracts take long to resolve,
and the process is very costly too. My Government proposes to introduce a
Public Contracts (Resolution of Disputes) Bill to streamline the institutional
arrangements for resolution of such disputes.
74.
There is also a need, I feel, to tackle the lack of common approach and
philosophy in the regulatory arrangements prevailing even within the different
sectors of infrastructure. Our Government, therefore, also proposes to introduce
a regulatory reform law that will bring about a cogency of approach across various
sectors of infrastructure.
Skill India
75.
India is one of the youngest nations in the world with more than 54% of
the total population below 25 years of age. Our young people have to be both
educated and employable for the jobs of the 21st Century. The Prime Minister
has explained how Skill India needs to be closely coordinated with Make in
India. Yet today less than 5% of our potential workforce gets formal skill training
to be employable and stay employable.
76.
We will soon be launching a National Skills Mission through the Skill
Development and Entrepreneurship Ministry. The Mission will consolidate skill
initiatives spread across several Ministries and allow us to standardize procedures
and outcomes across our 31 Sector Skill Councils.
77.
With rural population still forming close to 70% of India’s population,
enhancing the employability of rural youth is the key to unlocking India’s
demographic dividend. With this in mind, we had launched the Deen Dayal
Upadhyay Gramin Kaushal Yojana. ` 1,500 crore has been set apart for this
scheme. Disbursement will be through a digital voucher directly into qualified
student’s bank account.
78.
This is the year when we will be entering the 100th birth anniversary of
Shri Deen Dayalji Upadhyay. The intention of the Government is to celebrate
the anniversary of this great nationalist, in a befitting manner. A 100th Birthday
Celebration Committee will be announced soon, and adequate resources provided
for the celebration.
79.
With a view to enable all poor and middle class students to pursue higher
education of their choice without any constraint of funds, I propose to set up a
fully IT based Student Financial Aid Authority to administer and monitor
Scholarship as well Educational Loan Schemes, through the Pradhan Mantri
Vidya Lakshmi Karyakram. We will ensure that no student misses out on higher
education for lack of funds.
80.
Hon’ble Members will remember that in the Budget Speech of July,
I had indicated my intention to provide one major Central Institute in each State.
In the fiscal year 2015-16, I propose to set up All India Institutes of Medical
Sciences in J&K, Punjab, Tamil Nadu, Himachal Pradesh and Assam. Keeping
in view the need to augment Medical Sciences in Bihar, I propose to set up
another AIIMS like institution in these States. I propose to set up an IIT in
Karnataka, and upgrade Indian School of Mines, Dhanbad into a full-fledged
IIT. I also propose to set up a Post Graduate Institute of Horticulture Research
and Education in Amritsar. IIMs will be setup in J&K and Andhra Pradesh. In
Kerala, I propose to upgrade the existing National Institute of Speech and Hearing
to a University of Disability Studies and Rehabilitation. I also propose three
new National Institutes of Pharmaceutical Education and Research: in
Maharashtra, Rajasthan, and Chattisgarh; and an Institutes of Science and
Education Research in Nagaland and Odisha. I also propose to set up a Centre
for Film Production, Animation and Gaming in Arunachal Pradesh, for the North-
Eastern States; and Apprenticeship Training Institute for Women in Haryana and
Uttrakhand.
81.
In order to improve the Governance of Public Sector banks, the
Government intends to set up an autonomous bank Board Bureau. The Bureau
will search and select heads of Public Sector banks and help them in developing
differentiated strategies and capital raising plans through innovative financial
methods and instruments. This would be an interim step towards establishing a
holding and investment Company for Banks.
Digital India
82.
Madam, Speaker, I would like to inform the House we are making good
progress towards making Digital India. The National Optical Fibre Network
Programme (NOFNP) of 7.5 lakh kms. networking 2.5 lakh villages is being
further speeded up by allowing willing States to undertake its execution, on
reimbursement of cost as determined by Department of Telecommunications.
Andhra Pradesh is the first State to have opted for this manner of implementation.
83.
As Members are aware, in making their recommendations, the Finance
Commission has not distinguished between special category and other states.
Moreover, both Bihar and West Bengal are going to be amongst the biggest
beneficiaries of the recommendations of the Finance Commission. Yet, the Eastern
States have to be given an opportunity to grow even faster. I, therefore, propose
to give similar special assistance to Bihar and West Bengal as has been provided
by the Government of India in the case of Government of Andhra Pradesh. As
regards Andhra Pradesh and Telengana, the Government is committed to comply
with all the legal commitments made to these States at the time of reorganization.
84.
In spite of the large increase in devolution to states, which implies reduced
fiscal space for the Centre in the same proportion we are committed to the welfare
of the poor and the neo-middle class. Keeping this in mind, adequate provision
is being made for the schemes for the poor and the dis-advantaged. Illustratively,
I have allocated ` 68,968 crore to the education sector including mid-day meals,
` 33,152 crore to the health sector and ` 79,526 crore for rural development
activities including MGNREGA, ` 22,407 crore for housing and urban
development, ` 10,351 crore for women and child development, ` 4,173 crore
for Water Resources and Namami Gange. The significant sums that will be spent
by the States on these programmes will ensure a quantum leap in expenditures in
these areas. I urge states to utilize their enhanced resources effectively in these
areas.
85.
Madam, Speaker, I am delighted to report good progress for DMIC
corridors: the Ahmedabad-Dhaulera Investment Region in Gujarat, and the
Shendra–Bidkin Industrial Park near Aurangabad, in Maharashtra, are now in a
position to start work on basic infrastructure. In the current year, I have earmarked
an initial sum of ` 1,200 crore. However, as the pace of expenditure picks up, I
will provide them additional funds.
86.
Defence of every square inch of our mother land comes before anything
else. So far, we have been over dependent on imports, with its attendant
unwelcome spin-offs. Our Government has already permitted FDI in defence so
that the Indian-controlled entities also become manufacturers of defence
equipments, not only for us, but for export. We are thus pursuing the Make in
India policy to achieve greater self-sufficiency in the area of defence equipment,
including aircraft. Members of this august House would have noted that we
have been both transparent and quick in making defence equipment related
purchase decisions, thus keeping our defence forces ready for any eventuality.
This year too, I have provided adequately for the needs of the armed forces. As
against likely expenditure of this year of ` 2,22,370 crore the budget allocation
for 2015-16 is ` 2,46,727 crore.
87.
While India produces some of the finest financial minds, including in
international finance, they have few avenues in India to fully exhibit and exploit
their strength to the country’s advantage. GIFT in Gujarat was envisaged as
International Finance Centre that would actually become as good an International
Finance Centre as Singapore or Dubai, which, incidentally, are largely manned
by Indians. The proposal has languished for years. I am glad to announce that
the first phase of GIFT will soon become a reality. Appropriate regulations will
be issued in March.
88.
For the quick resolution of commercial disputes, the Government proposes
to set up exclusive commercial divisions in various courts in India based on the
recommendations of the 253rd Report of the Law Commission. The Government
proposes to introduce a Bill in the parliament after consulting stakeholders in
this regard.
89.
Madam Speaker, the Government will, during this session, also place
before the Parliament the required Bills, to convert Ordinances issued by the
Government into Acts of Parliament.
BUDGET ESTIMATES
90.
I now turn to the Budget Estimates for Budget 2015-16.
91.
Non-Plan expenditure estimates for the Financial Year are estimated at
` 13,12,200 crore. Plan expenditure is estimated to be ` 4,65,277 crore, which is
very near to the R.E. of 2014-15. Total Expenditure has accordingly been
estimated at ` 17,77,477 crore. The requirements for expenditure on Defence,
Internal Security and other necessary expenditures are adequately provided.
92.
Gross Tax receipts are estimated to be ` 14,49,490 crore. Devolution to
the States is estimated to be ` 5,23,958 crore. Share of Central Government will
be ` 9,19,842 crore. Non Tax Revenues for the next fiscal are estimated to be
` 2,21,733 crore.
93.
With the above estimates, fiscal deficit will be 3.9 per cent of GDP and
Revenue Deficit will be 2.8 per cent of GDP.
Madam Speaker,
94.
I now turn to my tax proposals.
95.
Taxation is an instrument of social and economic engineering. Tax
collections help the Government to provide education, healthcare, housing and
other basic facilities to the people to improve their quality of life and to address
the problems of poverty, unemployment and slow development. To achieve
these objectives, it has been our endeavour in the last nine months to foster a
stable taxation policy and non-adversarial tax administration. A very important
dimension to our tax administration is the fight against the scourge of black
money. A number of measures have already been taken in this direction.
I propose to do much more.
96.
We need to revive growth and investment to ensure that more jobs are
created for our youth and benefits of development reach millions of our poor.
We need an enabling tax policy for this. I have already introduced the Bill to
amend the Constitution of India for Goods and Services Tax (GST) in the last
Session of this august House. GST is expected to play a transformative role in
the way our economy functions. It will add buoyancy to our economy by
developing a common Indian market and reducing the cascading effect on the
cost of goods and services. We are moving in various fronts to implement GST
from the next year.
97.
We need to match this transformative piece of legislation in indirect
taxation with transformative measures in direct taxation. The basic rate of
Corporate Tax in India at 30% is higher than the rates prevalent in the other
major Asian economies, making our domestic industry uncompetitive. Moreover,
the effective collection of Corporate Tax is about 23%. We lose out on both
counts, i.e. we are considered as having a high Corporate Tax regime but we do
not get that tax due to excessive exemptions. A regime of exemptions has led to
pressure groups, litigation and loss of revenue. It also gives room for avoidable
discretion. I, therefore, propose to reduce the rate of Corporate Tax from 30% to
25% over the next 4 years. This will lead to higher level of investment, higher
growth and more jobs. This process of reduction has to be necessarily
accompanied by rationalisation and removal of various kinds of tax exemptions
and incentives for corporate taxpayers, which incidentally account for a large
number of tax disputes.
98.
I wanted to start the phased reduction of corporate tax rate and phased
elimination of exemptions right away; but I thought it would be appropriate to
give advance notice that these changes will start from the next financial year.
Our stated policy is to avoid sudden surprises and instability in tax policy.
Exemptions to individual taxpayers will, however, continue since they facilitate
savings which get transferred to investment and economic growth.
99.
While finalising my tax proposals, I have adopted certain broad themes,
which include:
A. Measures to curb black money;
B. Job creation through revival of growth and investment and promotion
of domestic manufacturing and ‘Make in India’;
C. Minimum government and maximum governance to improve the
ease of doing business;
D. Benefits to middle class taxpayers;
E. Improving the quality of life and public health through Swachch
Bharat initiatives; and
F. Stand alone proposals to maximise benefits to the economy.
100. Madam Speaker, the first and foremost pillar of my tax proposals is to
effectively deal with the problem of black money which eats into the vitals of
our economy and society. The problems of poverty and inequity cannot be
eliminated unless generation of black money and its concealment is dealt with
effectively and forcefully.
101. In the last 9 months several measures have been initiated in this direction.
A major breakthrough was achieved in October, 2014 when a delegation from
the Revenue Department visited Switzerland and the Swiss authorities agreed to
(a) provide information in respect of cases independently investigated by the
Income-tax Department; (b) confirm genuineness of bank accounts and provide
non-banking information; (c) provide such information in a time bound manner;
and (d) commence talks with India for Automatic Exchange of Information
between the two countries at the earliest. Investigation into cases of undisclosed
foreign assets has been accorded the highest priority, resulting in detection of
substantial amounts of unreported income. For strengthening collection of
information from various sources domestically, a new structure is being put in
place which includes electronic filing of statements by reporting entities. This
will ensure seamless integration of data and more effective enforcement.
102. Tracking down and bringing back the wealth which legitimately belongs
to the country is our abiding commitment to the country. Recognising the
limitations under the existing legislation, we have taken a considered decision
to enact a comprehensive new law on black money to specifically deal with such
money stashed away abroad. To this end, I propose to introduce a Bill in the
current Session of the Parliament.
103. With your permission, Madam Speaker, I would like to highlight some
of the key features of the proposed new law on black money.
(1) Concealment of income and assets and evasion of tax in relation to
foreign assets will be prosecutable with punishment of rigorous
imprisonment upto 10 years. Further,
• this offence will be made non-compoundable;
• the offenders will not be permitted to approach the Settlement
Commission; and
• penalty for such concealment of income and assets at the rate of
300% of tax shall be levied.
(2) Non filing of return or filing of return with inadequate disclosure of
foreign assets will be liable for prosecution with punishment of
rigorous imprisonment up to 7 years.
(3) Income in relation to any undisclosed foreign asset or undisclosed
income from any foreign asset will be taxable at the maximum
marginal rate. Exemptions or deductions which may otherwise be
applicable in such cases, shall not be allowed.
(4) Beneficial owner or beneficiary of foreign assets will be mandatorily
required to file return, even if there is no taxable income.
(5) Abettors of the above offences, whether individuals, entities, banks
or financial institutions will be liable for prosecution and penalty.
(6) Date of Opening of foreign account would be mandatorily required
to be specified by the assessee in the return of income.
(7) The offence of concealment of income or evasion of tax in relation
to a foreign asset will be made a predicate offence under the
Prevention of Money-laundering Act, 2002 (PMLA). This provision
would enable the enforcement agencies to attach and confiscate
unaccounted assets held abroad and launch prosecution against
persons indulging in laundering of black money.
(8) The definition of ‘proceeds of crime’ under PMLA is being amended
to enable attachment and confiscation of equivalent asset in India
where the asset located abroad cannot be forfeited.
(9) The Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (FEMA) is also being
amended to the effect that if any foreign exchange, foreign security
or any immovable property situated outside India is held in
contravention of the provisions of this Act, then action may be taken
for seizure and eventual confiscation of assets of equivalent value
situated in India. These contraventions are also being made liable
for levy of penalty and prosecution with punishment of imprisonment
up to five years.
104. As regards curbing domestic black money, a new and more comprehensive
Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Bill will be introduced in the current session
of the Parliament. This law will enable confiscation of benami property and
provide for prosecution, thus blocking a major avenue for generation and holding
of black money in the form of benami property, especially in real estate.
105. A few other measures are also proposed in the Budget for curbing black
money within the country. The Finance Bill includes a proposal to amend the
Income-tax Act to prohibit acceptance or payment of an advance of ` 20,000 or
more in cash for purchase of immovable property. Quoting of PAN is being
made mandatory for any purchase or sale exceeding the value of ` 1 lakh. The
third party reporting entities would be required to furnish information about
foreign currency sales and cross border transactions. Provision is also being
made to tackle splitting of reportable transactions. To improve enforcement,
CBDT and CBEC will leverage technology and have access to information in
each other’s database.
106. Madam Speaker, the second pillar of my taxation proposals this year is
job creation through revival of growth and investment and promotion of domestic
manufacturing and ‘Make in India’. I propose to undertake a series of steps in
this direction to attract capital, both domestic and foreign. Tax ‘pass through’ is
proposed to be allowed to both Category-I and Category-II Alternative Investment
Funds, so that tax is levied on the investors in these Funds and not on the Funds
per se. This will step up the ability of these Funds to mobilise higher resources
and make higher investments in small and medium enterprises, infrastructure
and social projects and provide the much required private equity to new ventures
and start-ups.
107. A step was taken in the last Budget to encourage Real Estate Investment
Trusts (REITs) and Infrastructure Investments Trusts (InvITs) by providing partial
pass through to them. These collective investment vehicles have an important
role to revive construction activity. A large quantum of funds is locked up in
various completed projects which need to be released to facilitate new
infrastructure projects to take off. I therefore propose to rationalise the capital
gains regime for the sponsors exiting at the time of listing of the units of REITs
and InvITs, subject to payment of Securities Transaction Tax (STT). The rental
income of REITs from their own assets will have pass through facility.
108. The present taxation structure has an inbuilt incentive for fund managers
to operate from offshore locations. To encourage such offshore fund managers
to relocate to India, I propose to modify the Permanent Establishment (PE) norms
to the effect that mere presence of a fund manager in India would not constitute
PE of the offshore funds resulting in adverse tax consequences.
109. Implementation of the General Anti Avoidance Rule (GAAR) has been a
matter of public debate. The investment sentiment in the country has now turned
positive and we need to accelerate this momentum. There are also certain
contentious issues relating to GAAR which need to be resolved. It has therefore
been decided to defer the applicability of GAAR by two years. Further, it has
also been decided that when implemented, GAAR would apply prospectively to
investments made on or after 01.04.2017.
110. Today I see a lot of young entrepreneurs running business ventures or
wanting to start new ones. They need latest technology. Therefore, to facilitate
technology inflow to small businesses at low costs, I propose to reduce the rate
of income tax on royalty and fees for technical services from 25% to 10%.
111. To generate greater employment opportunities, it is proposed to extend
the benefit of deduction for employment of new regular workmen to all business
entities. The eligibility threshold of minimum 100 regular workmen is being
reduced to fifty.
112. The role of indirect taxes is also very important in the context of promotion
of domestic manufacturing and Make in India. In indirect taxes, therefore, I
propose to reduce the rates of basic customs duty on certain inputs, raw materials,
intermediates and components (in all 22 items) so as to minimise the impact of
duty inversion and reduce the manufacturing cost in several sectors. Some
other changes address the problem of CENVAT credit accumulation due to the
levy of SAD. I propose to fully exempt all goods, except populated printed
circuit boards for use in manufacture of ITA bound items from SAD and reduce
the SAD on imports of certain other inputs and raw materials subject to actual
user condition. These changes are detailed in the Annexure to the Budget Speech.
113. My next proposal is regarding minimum government and maximum
governance with focus on ease of doing business and simplification of Tax
Procedures without compromising on tax revenues. The total wealth tax collection
in the country was ` 1,008 crore in 2013-14. Should a tax which leads to high
cost of collection and a low yield be continued or should it be replaced with a
low cost and higher yield tax? The rich and wealthy must pay more tax than the
less affluent ones. I have therefore decided to abolish the wealth tax and replace
it with an additional surcharge of 2% on the super-rich with a taxable income of
over ` 1 crore. This will lead to tax simplification and enable the Department to
focus more on ensuring tax compliance and widening the tax base. As against a
tax sacrifice of ` 1,008 crore, through these measures the Department would be
collecting about ` 9,000 crore from the 2% additional surcharge. Further, to
track the wealth held by individuals and entities, the information regarding the
assets which are currently required to be furnished in wealth-tax return will be
captured in the income tax returns. This will ensure that the abolition of wealth
tax does not lead to escape of any income from the tax net.
114. The provision relating to indirect transfers in the Income-tax Act which
is a legacy from the previous government contains several ambiguities. This
provision is being suitably cleaned up. Further, concerns regarding applicability
of indirect transfer provisions to dividends paid by foreign companies to their
shareholders will be addressed by the Central Board of Direct Taxes through a
clarificatory circular. These changes would eliminate the scope for discretionary
exercise of power and provide a hassle free structure to the taxpayers. I reiterate
what I had said in the last Budget that ordinarily retrospective tax provisions
adversely impact the stability and predictability of the taxation regime and resort
to such provisions shall be avoided.
115. Further, to reduce the associated hassles to smaller taxpayers and the
compliance costs in domestic transfer pricing, I propose to increase the threshold
limit from ` 5 crore to ` 20 crore.
116. In order to rationalise the MAT provisions for FIIs, profits corresponding
to their income from capital gains on transactions in securities which are liable
to tax at a lower rate, shall not be subject to MAT.
117. The Tax Administration Reform Commission (TARC) has given a number
of recommendations to improve the administration in the Tax Departments. These
recommendations are in advanced stage of examination and will be appropriately
implemented during the course of this year.
118. As part of the movement towards GST, I propose to subsume the
Education Cess and the Secondary and Higher Education Cess in Central Excise
duty. In effect, the general rate of Central Excise Duty of 12.36% including the
cesses is being rounded off to 12.5%. I also propose to revise the specific rates
of Central Excise duty in certain other commodities, as detailed in the Annexure.
However, in the case of petrol and diesel such specific rates are being revised
only to the extent of subsuming the quantum of education cess presently levied
on them, keeping the total incidence of excise duties unchanged. The ad-valorem
rates of excise duty lower than 12% and those higher than 12% with a few
exceptions are not being increased. Some changes are also being made to excise
levy on cigarettes and the compounded levy scheme applicable to pan masala,
gutkha and certain other tobacco products.
119. To give a boost to domestic leather footwear industry, the excise duty on
footwear with leather uppers and having retail price of more than ` 1000 per pair
is being reduced to 6%.
120. To further facilitate the ease of doing business, online central excise and
service tax registration will be done in two working days. The assessees under
these taxes will be allowed to issue digitally signed invoices and maintain
electronic records. These measures will cut down lot of paper work and red
tape. Time limit for taking CENVAT credit on inputs and input services is being
increased from six months to one year as a measure of business facilitation.
121. Introduction of GST is eagerly awaited by Trade and Industry. To facilitate
a smooth transition to levy of tax on services by both the Centre and the States,
it is proposed to increase the present rate of service tax plus education cesses
from 12.36% to a consolidated rate of 14%.
122. Madam Speaker, cleanliness of households and clean environment are
very important social causes. The fourth pillar of my taxation proposals this
year therefore relates to initiatives for the Swachh Bharat Abhiyan. In my direct
tax proposals, I have proposed 100% deduction for contributions, other than by
way of CSR contributions, to the Swachh Bharat Kosh. A similar tax treatment
is also proposed for the Clean Ganga Fund.
123. In indirect taxes, I propose to increase the Clean Energy Cess from ` 100
to ` 200 per metric tonne of coal, etc. to finance clean environment initiatives.
Excise duty on sacks and bags of polymers of ethylene other than for industrial
use is being increased from 12% to 15%. It is also proposed to have an enabling
provision to levy Swachh Bharat Cess at a rate of 2% or less on all or certain
services if need arises. This Cess will be effective from a date to be notified.
Resources generated from this cess will be utilised for financing and promoting
initiatives towards Swachh Bharat.
124. It is also proposed to exempt services by common affluent treatment
plants from service tax. The concessions from customs and excise duties currently
available on specified parts for manufacture of electrically operated vehicles
and hybrid vehicles are being extended by one more year i.e. up to 31.3.2016.
125. Madam Speaker, the fifth pillar of my taxation proposals this year is
extension of benefits to middle class tax payers. The proposals in this regard are
as follows :
3⁄4
Increase in the limit of deduction in respect of health insurance
premium from ` 15,000 to ` 25,000.
o
For senior citizens the limit will stand increased to ` 30,000 from
the existing ` 20,000.
For very senior citizens of the age of 80 years or more, who are
not covered by health insurance, deduction of ` 30,000 towards
expenditure incurred on their treatment will be allowed.
3⁄4 The deduction limit of ` 60,000 towards expenditure on account of
specified diseases of serious nature is proposed to be enhanced to
` 80,000 in case of very senior citizens.
3⁄4 Additional deduction of ` 25,000 will be allowed for differently abled
persons under Section 80DD and Section 80U of the Income-tax
Act.
3⁄4 The limit on deduction on account of contribution to a Pension Fund
and the New Pension Scheme is proposed to be increased from
` 1 lakh to ` 1.5 lakh.
3⁄4 To provide social safety net and the facility of pension to individuals,
an additional deduction of ` 50,000 is proposed to be provided for
contribution to the New Pension Scheme under Section 80CCD.
This will enable India to become a pensioned society instead of a
pensionless society.
3⁄4 Investments in Sukanya Samriddhi Scheme is already eligible for
deduction under Section 80C. All payments to the beneficiaries
including interest payment on deposit will also be fully exempt.
3⁄4 Transport allowance exemption is being increased from ` 800 to
` 1,600 per month.
3⁄4 For the benefit of senior citizens, service tax exemption will be
provided on Varishta Bima Yojana.
126. Madam Speaker, I am giving these concessions to individual taxpayers
despite inadequate fiscal space. After taking into account the tax concession
given to middle class tax payers in my last Budget and this Budget, today an
individual tax payer will get tax benefit of ` 4,44,200 as detailed in the annexure.
As and when my fiscal capacity improves, individual taxpayers will have a lot to
look forward to.
127. Madam Speaker, there are several stand-alone proposals relating to
taxation. These include conversion of existing excise duty on petrol and diesel
to the extent of ` 4 per litre into Road Cess to fund investment in roads and other
infrastructure. An additional sum of ` 40,000 crore will be made available through
this measure for these sectors. In service tax, exemption is being extended to
certain pre cold storage services in relation to fruits and vegetables so as to
incentivise value addition in this crucial sector. The Negative List under service
tax is being slightly pruned and certain other exemptions are being withdrawn to
widen the tax base.
128. Yoga is India’s well acknowledged gift to the world. It is proposed to
include yoga within the ambit of charitable purpose under Section 2(15) of the
Income-tax Act. Further, to mitigate the problem being faced by many genuine
charitable institutions, it is proposed to modify the ceiling on receipts from
activities in the nature of trade, commerce or business to 20% of the total receipts
from the existing ceiling of ` 25 lakh. A national database of non profit
organisations is also being developed.
129. Enactment of a Direct Taxes Code (DTC) has been under discussion for
quite some time. Most of the provisions of the DTC have already been included
in the Income-tax Act. Among the very few aspects of DTC which were left out,
we have addressed some of the issues in the present Budget. Further, the
jurisprudence under the Income-tax Act is well evolved. Considering all these
aspects, there is no great merit in going ahead with the Direct Tax Code as it
exists today.
130. Madam Speaker, the details of direct and indirect tax proposals are given
in the Annexure to the Budget speech and the other budget documents laid on
the Table of the House. My direct tax proposals would result in revenue loss of
` 8,315 crore, whereas the proposals in indirect taxes are expected to yield ` 23,383
crore. Thus, the net impact of all tax proposals would be revenue gain of ` 15,068
crore.
CONCLUSION
131. To conclude, Madam Speaker, it is no secret that expectations of this
Budget have been high. People who urge us to undertake Big Bang Reforms,
also say that the Indian economy is a giant super tanker, or an elephant. An
elephant, Madam Speaker, moves slowly but surely. Even our worst critics would
admit that we have moved rapidly. In this speech, I think I have clearly outlined
not only what we are going to do immediately, but also a roadmap for the future.
132. I think I can genuinely stake, for our Government, a claim of intellectual
honesty. We have been consistent in what we have said, and what we are doing.
We are committed, Madam Speaker, to achieving what we have been voted to
power for: Change, growth, jobs and genuine, effective upliftment of the poor
and the under-privileged. Our commitment to the ‘Daridra Narayan’ is steadfast,
as is commitment to the Constitutional principles of Equality and Justice for All,
without concern for caste, creed or religion. This will be in the spirit of the
Upanishad-inspired mantra:
Om Sarve Bhavantu Sukhinah
Sarve Santu Nir-Aamayaah
Sarve Bhadraanni Pashyantu
Maa Kashcid-Duhkha-Bhaag-Bhavet
Om Shaantih Shaantih Shaantih
(OM! May All Be Happy
May All Be Free From Illness
May All See What is Beneficial
May No One Suffer)
133.
With these words, Madam Speaker, I commend the Budget to the House.
