Madam Speaker,
I rise to present the Budget for the year 2016-17.
2.
I am presenting this Budget when the global economy is in serious
crisis. Global growth has slowed down from 3.4% in 2014 to 3.1% in 2015.
Financial markets have been battered and global trade has contracted.
Amidst all these global headwinds, the Indian economy has held its ground
firmly. Thanks to our inherent strengths and the policies of this Government,
a lot of confidence and hope continues to be built around India.
3.
The International Monetary Fund has hailed India as a ‘bright spot’
amidst a slowing global economy. The World Economic Forum has said that
India’s growth is ‘extraordinarily high’. We accomplished this despite very
unfavourable conditions and despite the fact that we inherited an economy of
low growth, high inflation and zero investor confidence in Government’s
capability to govern. We converted these difficulties and challenges into
opportunities.
4.
Let us look at our achievements compared to the last three years of
the previous Government when growth had decelerated to 6.3%. The growth
of GDP has now accelerated to 7.6%. This was possible notwithstanding the
contraction of global exports by 4.4% compared to 7.7% growth in world
exports during the last three years of the previous Government. CPI inflation
was at 9.4% during the last three years of the previous Government. Under
our Government, CPI inflation has come down to 5.4%, providing big relief
to the public. This was accomplished despite two consecutive years of
monsoon shortfall of 13%, compared to normal rainfall in the last three years
of the previous Government.
5.
Our external situation is robust. The Current Account deficit has
declined from 18.4 billion US dollars in the first half of last year to 14.4
billion this year. It is projected to be 1.4% of GDP at the end of this year.
Our foreign exchange reserves are at the highest ever level of about 350
billion US dollars.
6.
Our initiatives in the last 21 months have not only placed the
economy on a faster growth trajectory but have bridged the trust deficit,
created by the previous Government. We had to work in an unsupportive
global environment, adverse weather conditions and an obstructive political
atmosphere.
7.
We believe in the principle that money with the Government belongs
to the people and we have the sacred responsibility to spend it prudently and
wisely for the welfare of our people, especially the poor and the
downtrodden. We have increased our Plan expenditure at the RE stage in
2015-16 in contrast to the usual practice of reducing it. We achieved this
despite adopting the Fourteenth Finance Commission recommendations
which increased devolution to the States by 55%.
8.
We must now look ahead. The risks of further global slowdown and
turbulence are mounting.
This complicates the task of economic
management for India. It has three serious implications for us. First, we
must strengthen our firewalls against these risks by ensuring macro-
economic stability and prudent fiscal management. Second, since foreign
markets are weak, we must rely on domestic demand and Indian markets to
ensure that India’s growth does not slow down. And third, we must continue
with the pace of economic reforms and policy initiatives to change the lives
of our people for the better.
9.
We see these challenges as opportunities. The financial years
2015-16 and 2016-17 have been and will be extremely challenging for
Government expenditure. The 14 th Finance Commission has reduced the
Central share of taxes to 58% from the 68%. In the financial year 2015-16,
we managed to improve upon the budgeted expenditure due to revenue
buoyancy, notwithstanding the steep reduction in the Central share of taxes.
The next financial year 2016-17 will cast an additional burden on account of
the recommendations of the 7 th Central Pay Commission and the
implementation of Defence OROP. The Government, therefore, has to
prioritise its expenditure. We wish to enhance expenditure in the farm and
rural sector, the social sector, the infrastructure sector and provide for
recapitalisation of the banks. This will address those sectors which need
immediate attention. Once the Government discharges these priority
obligations, it shall then focus on other areas which are also of utmost
priority to the Government.
10.
While increasing the outlay of various social sector programmes, the
Government will undertake three major schemes to help the weaker sections
of the society. The Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana has already been
announced to protect the farmer from the adverse consequences of nature.
The farmer will pay a nominal amount of insurance premium and get the
highest ever compensation in the event of any loss suffered. A health
insurance scheme which protects one-third of India’s population against
hospitalisation expenditure is also being announced. The Government is
also launching a new initiative to ensure that the BPL families are
provided with a cooking gas connection, supported by a Government
subsidy. This will significantly improve the health of women and those BPL
families who suffer adversely from the ill-effects of Chulha cooking.
11.
The Annual Budget is also an opportunity for the Government to
outline its priorities for the year to come. The priority of our Government is
clearly to provide additional resources for vulnerable sections, rural areas
and social and physical infrastructure creation. The Government shall also
endeavour to continue with the ongoing reform programme and ensure the
passage of the Constitutional amendments to enable the implementation of
the Goods and Service Tax, the passage of Insolvency and Bankruptcy law
and other important reform measures which are pending before the
Parliament.
12.
Additionally, as I will elaborate later, we will undertake significant
reforms, such as the enactment of a law to ensure that all Government
benefits are conferred upon persons who deserve it, by giving a statutory
backing to the AADHAR platform; bringing significant changes in the
legislative framework relating to the transport sector so as to free it from
constraints and restrictions; incentivising gas discovery and exploration by
providing calibrated marketing freedom; enactment of a comprehensive law
to deal with resolution of financial firms; providing legal framework for
dispute resolution in PPP projects and public utility contracts; undertaking
important banking sector reforms and public listing of general insurance
companies; and undertaking significant changes in FDI policy.
13.
Our agenda for the next year is, therefore, to ‘Transform India’ in this
direction. My Budget proposals are, therefore, built on this transformative
agenda with nine distinct pillars. These include:
(i) Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare: with focus on doubling
farmers’ income in five years;
(ii) Rural Sector: with emphasis on rural employment and
infrastructure;
(iii) Social Sector including Healthcare: to cover all under welfare
and health services;
(iv) Education, Skills and Job Creation: to make India a
knowledge based and productive society;
(v) Infrastructure and Investment: to enhance efficiency and
quality of life;
(vi) Financial Sector Reforms: to bring transparency and stability;
(vii) Governance and Ease of Doing Business: to enable the people
to realise their full potential;
(viii) Fiscal Discipline: prudent management of Government
finances and delivery of benefits to the needy; and
(ix) Tax Reforms: to reduce compliance burden with faith in the
citizenry.
In each of these themes, I shall outline specific policy measures and
initiatives which would have a transformative impact on our economy and
the lives of our people.
I.
Agriculture and Farmers' Welfare
14.
Let me first take up Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare. We are
grateful to our farmers for being the backbone of the country’s food security.
We need to think beyond ‘food security’ and give back to our farmers a
sense of ‘income security’. Government will, therefore, reorient its
interventions in the farm and non-farm sectors to double the income of the
farmers by 2022. Our total allocation for Agriculture and Farmers’ welfare
is ` 35,984 crore.
15.
We need to address issues of optimal utilisation of our water
resources; create new infrastructure for irrigation; conserve soil fertility with
balanced use of fertilizer; and provide value addition and connectivity from
farm to markets.
16.
Irrigation is a critical input for increasing agriculture production and
productivity. Out of 141 million hectares of net cultivated area in the
country, only 46% is covered with irrigation.
17.
The ‘Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchai Yojana’ has been strengthened
and will be implemented in mission mode. 28.5 lakh hectares will be brought
under irrigation under this Scheme.
18.
Implementation of 89 irrigation projects under AIBP, which have
been languishing, will be fast tracked. This will help to irrigate 80.6 lakh
hectares. These projects require ` 17,000 crore next year and ` 86,500 crore
in the next five years. We will ensure that 23 of these projects are completed
before 31 st March, 2017.
19.
A dedicated Long Term Irrigation Fund will be created in
NABARD with an initial corpus of about ` 20,000 crore. To achieve all
these, a total provision of ` 12,517 crore has been made through
budgetary support and market borrowings in 2016-17.
20.
Simultaneously a major programme for sustainable management
of ground water resources has been prepared with an estimated cost of
` 6,000 crore and proposed for multilateral funding.
21.
At least 5 lakh farm ponds and dug wells in rain fed areas and 10 lakh
compost pits for production of organic manure will be taken up by making
productive use of the allocations under MGNREGA.
22.
The Soil Health Card Scheme is now being implemented with greater
vigour. Through this, farmers get information about nutrient level of the soil
and can make judicious use of fertilizers. The target is to cover all 14 crore
farm holdings by March 2017. ` 368 crore has been provided for National
Project on Soil Health and Fertility. Besides, 2,000 model retail outlets of
Fertilizer companies will be provided with soil and seed testing facilities
during the next three years. Fertilizer companies will also co-market city
compost which increases the efficacy of chemical fertilizer. A policy for
conversion of city waste into compost has also been approved by the
Government under the Swachh Bharat Abhiyan.
23.
To increase crop yields in rain fed areas, which account for nearly
55% of the country’s arable land, organic farming is being promoted.
Towards this end, the Government has launched two important schemes.
First, the ‘Parmparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana’ which will bring 5 lakh acres
under organic farming over a three year period. Second, the Government has
launched a value chain based organic farming scheme called “Organic Value
Chain Development in North East Region”. The emphasis is on value
addition so that organic produce grown in these parts find domestic and
export markets. A total provision of ` 412 crore has been made for these
schemes.
24.
Incentives are being given for enhancement of pulses production.
` 500 crores under National Food Security Mission has been assigned to
pulses. The number of districts covered has been increased to 622.
25.
A national level competition will be held among 674 Krishi Vigyan
Kendras with a total prize money of ` 50 lakh to improve the efficiency
and performance of these Kendras.
26.
Access to markets is critical for the income of farmers. The
Government is implementing the Unified Agriculture Marketing Scheme
which envisages a common e-market platform that will be deployed in
selected 585 regulated wholesale markets. Amendments to the APMC Acts
of the States are a pre-requisite to join this e-platform. I am happy to inform
that 12 States have already amended their APMC Acts and are ready to come
on board. More States are expected to join this platform in the coming year.
The Unified Agricultural Marketing E Platform will be dedicated to the
Nation on the birthday of Dr. Baba Saheb Ambedkar on 14 th April this
year.
27.
97 lakh MT of storage capacity was added to the Central pool stock
during the current year.
28.
We are implementing the Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana
(PMGSY) as never before. This Scheme had suffered in the past because of
underfunding. The allocations in 2012-13 and 2013-14 were only ` 8,885
crore and ` 9,805 crore respectively. We have substantially increased the
allocation in the last two years and have now allocated ` 19,000 crore in
2016-17. Together with States’ share, totally about ` 27,000 crore will be
spent on this Yojana in 2016-17. Our goal is to advance the completion
target of the programme from 2021 to 2019 and connect the remaining
65,000 eligible habitations by constructing 2.23 lakh kms of roads.
Accordingly, the pace of construction which is currently 100 kms per day, as
compared to the average of 73.5 kms during 2011-14, will be substantially
stepped up.
29.
To support farmers in the aftermath of natural calamities,
Government has revised the norms of assistance under the National Disaster
Response Fund in April 2015.
30.
Special focus has been given to ensure adequate and timely flow of
credit to the farmers. Against the target of ` 8.5 lakh crore in 2015-16, the
target for agricultural credit in 2016-17 will be an all-time high of ` 9 lakh
crore. To reduce the burden of loan repayment on farmers, a provision of
` 15,000 crore has been made in the BE 2016-17 towards interest subvention.
31.
Government has approved the path breaking Crop Insurance Scheme,
namely, Prime Minister Fasal Bima Yojana. For effective implementation of
this Scheme, I have provided a sum of ` 5,500 crore in the Budget 2016-17.
32.
We have to ensure that the benefit of MSP reaches farmers in all
parts of the country. Three specific initiatives will be taken up in 2016-17
for this. First, the remaining States will be encouraged to take up
decentralized procurement. Second, an online Procurement System will
be undertaken through the Food Corporation of India. This will usher
in transparency and convenience to the farmers through prior
registration and monitoring of actual procurement. Third, effective
arrangements have been made for pulses procurement.
33.
Farmers also take up other allied activities to supplement their family
income. To make dairying more remunerative to the farmers, four new
projects will be taken up: first, the ‘Pashudhan Sanjivani’, an animal
wellness programme and provision of Animal Health Cards (‘Nakul
Swasthya Patra’); second, an Advanced breeding technology; third,
Creation of ‘E-Pashudhan Haat’, an e market portal for connecting
breeders and farmers; and fourth, a National Genomic Centre for
indigenous breeds. These projects will be implemented at a cost of ` 850
crores over the next few years.
34.
There has been a visible rise in the yield of honey, from an average of
18 to 20 kg per box per annum in the year 2013-14 to 25 kg per box per
annum by 2015-16. The total production of honey in the country has
increased from 76,150 metric tonnes in 2014-15 to 86,500 metric tonnes.
90% of the domestic honey is now exported.
II.
Rural Sector
35.
After agriculture, I now turn to the other segments of the rural
economy.
36.
A sum of ` 2.87 lakh crore will be given as Grant in Aid to Gram
Panchayats and Municipalities as per the recommendations of the 14 th
Finance Commission. This is a quantum jump of 228% compared to the
previous five year period. The funds now allocated, translate to an average
assistance of over ` 80 lakh per Gram Panchayat and over ` 21 crore per
Urban Local Body. These enhanced allocations are capable of transforming
villages and small towns. Ministry of Panchayati Raj will work with the
States and evolve guidelines to actualise this.
37.
There is an urgent need to focus on areas of drought and rural
distress. Every block in these distress areas will be taken up as an intensive
Block under the Deen Dayal Antyodaya Mission. Formation of Self Help
Groups (SHGs) will be speeded up to promote multiple livelihoods. Cluster
Facilitation Teams (CFT) will be set up under MGNREGS to ensure water
conservation and natural resource management. These districts would also
be taken up on priority under Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchaii Yojna.
38.
A sum of ` 38,500 crore has been allocated for MGNREGS in
2016-17.
39.
300 Rurban Clusters will be developed under the Shyama Prasad
Mukherjee Rurban Mission launched by the Honourable Prime Minister
recently. These Clusters will incubate growth centres in rural areas by
providing infrastructure amenities and market access for the farmers. They
will also expand employment opportunities for the youth.
40.
As on 1 st April, 2015, a total of 18,542 villages were not electrified.
The Honourable Prime Minister, in his address to the Nation on 15 th August,
2015 announced that the remaining villages will be electrified within the
next 1000 days.
41.
As on 23 rd February, 2016, 5542 villages have been electrified. This
is more than the total combined achievement of previous three years. The
Government is committed to achieve 100% village electrification by
1 st May, 2018. ` 8,500 crore has been provided for Deendayal Upadhayaya
Gram Jyoti Yojna and Integrated Power Development Schemes.
42.
Swachh Bharat Mission is India’s biggest drive to improve sanitation
and cleanliness, especially in rural India. This subject was very close to the
heart of the Father of the Nation. For the first time since independence, the
Parliament held a comprehensive debate on sanitation. This has become a
topic of discussion in almost every home. We have introduced ranking of
urban areas in sanitation which has resulted in constructive competition
among towns and cities. ` 9,000 crore has been provided for Swachh Bharat
Abhiyan.
43.
In order to continue this momentum, priority allocation from
Centrally Sponsored Schemes will be made to reward villages that have
become free from open defecation.
44.
We need to derive greater benefit from our demographic advantage.
We need to spread digital literacy in rural India. Of the 16.8 crore rural
households as many as 12 crore households do not have computers and are
unlikely to have digitally literate persons. We have already approved two
Schemes to promote digital literacy: National Digital Literacy Mission; and
Digital Saksharta Abhiyan (DISHA). We now plan to launch a new Digital
Literacy Mission Scheme for rural India to cover around 6 crore
additional households within the next 3 years. Details of this scheme will
be spelt out separately.
45.
Modernisation of land records is critical for dispute free titles. The
National Land Record Modernisation Programme has been revamped under
the Digital India Initiative and will be implemented as a Central sector
scheme with effect from 1 st April, 2016. The revamped Programme will
build an integrated land information management system. ` 150 crore has
been provided for this purpose.
46.
Panchayat Raj Institutions need to develop governance capabilities to
deliver on the Sustainable Development Goals. It is, therefore, proposed to
launch a new restructured scheme, namely, Rashtriya Gram Swaraj
Abhiyan, for which ` 655 crore is being set apart in 2016-17.
47.
For rural development as a whole, I have allocated ` 87,765 crore in
the Budget for 2016-17.
III.
Social Sector including Health Care
48.
When asked what he intends doing for regeneration of India, Swami
Vivekananda had said “no amount of politics would be of any avail until the
masses in India are well educated, well fed and well cared for”. I now
proceed to present the key elements of my proposals in the Social Sector.
49.
In our country, cooking gas cylinders were considered an upper
middle class luxury. Gradually it spread to the middle class. But the poor do
not have access to cooking gas. Women of India have faced the curse of
smoke during the process of cooking. According to experts having an open
fire in the kitchen is like burning 400 cigarettes an hour. The time has come
to remedy this situation.
50.
We have decided to embark upon on a massive mission to
provide LPG connection in the name of women members of poor
households. I have set aside a sum of ` 2,000 crore in this year’s Budget
to meet the initial cost of providing these LPG connections. This will
benefit about 1 crore 50 lakh households below the poverty line in 2016-17.
The Scheme will be continued for at least two more years to cover a total of
5 crore BPL households. This will ensure universal coverage of cooking gas
in the country. This measure will empower women and protect their health.
It will reduce drudgery and the time spent on cooking. It will also provide
employment for rural youth in the supply chain of cooking gas.
51.
I want to take this opportunity to express our gratitude and
appreciation for the 75 lakh middle class and lower middle class households
who have voluntarily given up their cooking gas subsidy, in response to the
call given by the Hon’ble Prime Minister. Their gesture is a matter of pride
for the country.
52.
Catastrophic health events are the single most important cause of
unforeseen out-of-pocket expenditure which pushes lakhs of households
below the poverty line every year. Serious illness of family members cause
severe stress on the financial circumstances of poor and economically weak
families, shaking the foundation of their economic security. In order to
help such families, the Government will launch a new health protection
scheme which will provide health cover up to Rs.One lakh per family.
For senior citizens of age 60 years and above belonging to this category,
an additional top-up package up to ` 30,000 will be provided.
53.
Making quality medicines available at affordable prices has been a
key challenge. We will reinvigorate the supply of generic drugs. 3,000
Stores under Prime Minister’s Jan Aushadhi Yojana will be opened during
2016-17.
54.
About 2.2 lakh new patients of End Stage Renal Disease get added in
India every year resulting in additional demand for 3.4 crore dialysis
sessions. With approximately 4,950 dialysis centres in India, largely in the
private sector and concentrated in the major towns, the demand is only half
met. Every dialysis session costs about ` 2,000 – an annual expenditure of
more than ` 3 lakh. Besides, most families have to undertake frequent trips,
often over long distances, to access dialysis services, incurring heavy travel
costs and loss of wages.
55.
To address this situation, I propose to start a ‘National Dialysis
Services Programme’. Funds will be made available through PPP mode
under the National Health Mission, to provide dialysis services in all
district hospitals. To reduce the cost, I propose to exempt certain parts
of dialysis equipment from basic customs duty, excise/CVD and SAD.
56.
Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe entrepreneurs are beginning to
show great promise in starting and running successful business enterprises.
The Prime Minister had given a call for promoting entrepreneurship among
SC/ST to become job providers rather than job seekers. I am happy to
inform you that the Union Cabinet has approved the “Stand Up India
Scheme” to promote entrepreneurship among SC/ST and women. ` 500
crore has been provided for this purpose. The Scheme will facilitate at least
two such projects per bank branch, one for each category of entrepreneur.
This will benefit at least 2.5 lakh entrepreneurs.
57.
We are celebrating the 125 th Birth Anniversary of Dr. B.R.
Ambedkar. This must become the Year of Economic Empowerment for
SC/ST entrepreneurs. We have extensively interacted with the Dalit India
Chamber of Commerce and Industry on building an entrepreneurship eco-
system. It is proposed to constitute a National Scheduled Caste and
Scheduled Tribe Hub in the MSME Ministry in partnership with industry
associations. This Hub will provide professional support to Scheduled Caste
and Scheduled Tribe entrepreneurs to fulfil the obligations under the Central
Government procurement policy 2012, adopt global best practices and
leverage the Stand Up India initiative.
58.
The schemes for welfare and skill development for Minorities such as
Multi-sectoral Development Programme and USTAAD shall be
implemented effectively.
IV.
Education, Skills and Job Creation
59.
I would now like to highlight the steps proposed to be taken under
education, skill development and job creation which is the fourth pillar of my
Budget proposals.
Education
60.
After universalisation of primary education throughout the country,
we want to take the next big step forward by focusing on the quality of
education. An increasing share of allocation under Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan
will be allocated for this. Further, 62 new Navodaya Vidyalayas will be
opened in the remaining uncovered districts over the next two years.
61.
It is our commitment to empower Higher Educational Institutions to
help them become world class teaching and research institutions. An
enabling regulatory architecture will be provided to ten public and ten
private institutions to emerge as world-class Teaching and Research
Institutions. This will enhance affordable access to high quality education
for ordinary Indians. A detailed scheme will be formulated.
62.
We have decided to set up a Higher Education Financing Agency
(HEFA) with an initial capital base of ` 1,000 crores. The HEFA will be a
not-for-profit organisation that will leverage funds from the market and
supplement them with donations and CSR funds. These funds will be
used to finance improvement in infrastructure in our top institutions and will
be serviced through internal accruals.
63.
To help Students, Higher Education Institutions and Employers to
access degree certificates of candidates, it is proposed to establish a Digital
Depository for School Leaving Certificates, College Degrees, Academic
Awards and Mark sheets, on the pattern of a Securities Depository. This
will help validate their authenticity, safe storage and easy retrieval.
Skill Development
64.
“Skill India” mission seeks to capitalise our demographic advantage.
Since its launch, the National Skill Development Mission has created an
elaborate skilling eco-system and imparted training to 76 lakh youth. We
want to bring entrepreneurship to the doorsteps of youth through Pradhan
Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY). We have decided to set up 1500
Multi Skill Training Institutes across the country. I am setting aside an
amount of ` 1,700 crore for these initiatives.
65.
We have decided to set up a National Board for Skill Development
Certification in partnership with the industry and academia. We propose to
further scale up Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojna to skill one crore
youth over the next three years.
66.
Entrepreneurship Education and Training will be provided in
2200 colleges, 300 schools, 500 Government ITIs and 50 Vocational
Training Centres through Massive Open Online Courses. Aspiring
entrepreneurs, particularly those from remote parts of the country, will be
connected to mentors and credit markets.
Job Creation
67.
In order to incentivize creation of new jobs in the formal sector,
Government of India will pay the Employee Pension Scheme
contribution of 8.33% for all new employees enrolling in EPFO for the
first three years of their employment. This will incentivize the employers
to recruit unemployed persons and also to bring into the books the informal
employees. In order to channelize this intervention towards the target group
of semi-skilled and unskilled workers, the scheme will be applicable to those
with salary up to ` 15,000 per month. I have made a budget provision of
` 1,000 crore for this scheme.
68.
Further, the Finance Bill, 2016 proposes to broaden and liberalize the
scope of the employment generation incentive available under Section
80JJAA of the Income Tax Act. The deduction will be available not only to
assessees deriving income from manufacture of goods in a factory but to all
assessees who are subject to statutory audit under the Act. Thus, a deduction
of 30% of the emoluments paid to such employees can be claimed for three
years. The minimum number of days for which they should be employed
during the year is proposed to be reduced from 300 to 240 days. No
deduction will, however, be admissible in respect of employees whose
monthly emoluments exceed ` 25,000. Also, no deduction will be admissible
in respect of employees for whom the Government is paying the entire EPS
contribution.
69.
A National Career Service was launched in July, 2015. Already 35
million jobs seekers have registered on this platform. We propose to make
100 Model Career Centres operational by the end of 2016-17. We also
propose to inter-link State Employment Exchanges with the National Career
Service platform.
70.
Retail Trade is the largest service sector employer in the country.
Many more jobs can be created in this sector, provided the regulations are
simplified. If Shopping Malls are kept open all seven days of the week,
why not the small and medium shops? These shops should be given the
choice to remain open on all seven days of the week on voluntary basis.
The interest of the workers in terms of mandatory weekly holiday, number of
working hours per day, etc., of course, have to be protected. We propose to
circulate a Model Shops and Establishments Bill which can be adopted by
the State Governments on voluntary basis.
V.
Infrastructure and Investment
71.
The fifth support pillar of the Budget theme ‘Transform India’ is
infrastructure and investment.
72.
In the road sector, there were more than 70 projects that were
languishing at the beginning of the year, due to legacy factors. Aggregate
length of these projects was about 8,300 kms involving more than ` 1 lakh
crore investment. With exemplary and proactive interventions, nearly 85%
of these projects have been put back on track.
73.
India’s highest ever kilometres of new highways were awarded in
2015. At the same time, India’s highest ever production of motor vehicles
was achieved in 2015. This is a sign of growth in the economy; but it
presents a challenge also. Therefore, we have speeded up the process of road
construction. I have proposed an allocation of ` 55,000 crore in the Budget
for Roads and Highways. This will be further topped up by additional
` 15,000 crore to be raised by NHAI through bonds. Thus the total
investment in the road sector, including PMGSY allocation, would be
` 97,000 crore during 2016-17.
74.
Together with the capital expenditure of the Railways, the total
outlay on roads and railways will be ` 2,18,000 crore in 2016-17.
75.
We further expect to approve nearly 10,000 kms of National
Highways in 2016-17. This will be much higher than in the two previous
years. The pace of completion of road projects will also rise to nearly 10,000
kms in 2016-17. In addition, nearly 50,000 kms of State highways will also
be taken up for up-gradation as National Highways.
76.
The total outlay for infrastructure in BE 2016-17 stands at ` 2,21,246
crore.
77.
Passenger traffic on our roads has to be made more efficient for the
benefit of the common man and the middle class. This is a totally
unreformed sector which suffers from several impediments. Abolition of
permit-raj will be our medium term goal. Government will enact necessary
amendments in the Motor Vehicles Act and open up the road transport
sector in the passenger segment. An enabling eco-system will be
provided for the States which will have the choice of adopting the new
legal framework. Entrepreneurs will be able to operate buses on various
routes, subject to certain efficiency and safety norms. The major benefits of
this game changing initiative will be provision of more efficient public
transport facilities, greater public convenience, new investment in this
moribund sector, creation of new jobs for our youth, growth of start-up
entrepreneurs and other multiplier effects. These measures will take us faster
down the road to development.
78.
In 2015, India’s major ports have handled the highest ever quality of
cargo. We have also added the highest ever capacity in major ports. We
have started a series of measures for modernizing the ports and increasing
their efficiency. The Sagarmala project has already been rolled out. We are
planning to develop new greenfield ports both in the eastern and western
coasts of the country. The work on the National Waterways is also being
expedited. ` 800 crore has been provided for these initiatives.
79.
In the civil aviation sector, the Government is drawing up an action
plan for revival of unserved and underserved airports. There are about 160
airports and air strips with State Governments which can be revived at an
indicative cost of ` 50 crore to ` 100 crore each. We will partner with the
State Governments to develop some of these airports for regional
connectivity. Similarly, 10 of the 25 non-functional air strips with the
Airport Authority of India will also be developed.
80.
India is blessed with rich natural resources including oil and gas.
However, their discovery and exploitation has been below our potential.
Imports of hydrocarbons occupy a large share of India’s total imports. There
is a situation of rising demand, near stagnation in production and consequent
rapid increase in imports. As part of our drive towards self-sufficiency, the
Government is considering to incentivise gas production from deep-water,
ultra deep-water and high pressure-high temperature areas, which are
presently not exploited on account of higher cost and higher risks. A
proposal is under consideration for new discoveries and areas which are
yet to commence production, first, to provide calibrated marketing
freedom; and second, to do so at a pre-determined ceiling price to be
discovered on the principle of landed price of alternative fuels.
81.
In the other segments of the infrastructure sector, our Government
has achieved the highest coal production growth in over two decades, highest
ever capacity addition in generation, highest ever increase in transmission
lines and in distribution of LED bulbs.
82.
In the power sector, we need to diversify the sources of power
generation for long term stability. Government is drawing up a
comprehensive plan, spanning next 15 to 20 years, to augment the
investment in nuclear power generation. Budgetary allocation up to ` 3,000
crore per annum, together with public sector investments, will be leveraged
to facilitate the required investment for this purpose.
83.
To augment infrastructure spending further, Government will permit
mobilisation of additional finances to the extent of ` 31,300 crore by NHAI,
PFC, REC, IREDA, NABARD and Inland Water Authority through raising
of Bonds during 2016-17.
84.
Our private sector plays an important role in the development of
infrastructure, many of which are implemented in the Public Private
Partnership (PPP) mode. I would like to announce three new initiatives to
reinvigorate this sector.
(i)
A Public Utility (Resolution of Disputes) Bill will be
introduced during 2016-17 to streamline institutional
arrangements for resolution of disputes in infrastructure
related construction contracts, PPP and public utility
contracts;
(ii) Guidelines for renegotiation of PPP Concession
Agreements will be issued, keeping in view the long term
nature of such contracts and potential uncertainties of the
real economy, without compromising transparency;
(iii) A new credit rating system for infrastructure projects
which gives emphasis to various in-built credit
enhancement structures will be developed, instead of
relying upon a standard perception of risk which often
result in mispriced loans.
85.
I would like to announce further reforms in our FDI policy. The
changes proposed are in the areas of insurance and pension, Asset
Reconstruction Companies, Stock Exchanges, etc. Details of the changes are
given in Annex I of the Budget Speech.
86.
The duty drawback scheme has been widened and deepened to
include more products and countries. The Government will continue to take
measures to support the export sector.
87.
Our FDI policy has to address the requirements of farmers and food
processing industry. A lot of fruits and vegetables grown by our farmers
either do not fetch the right prices or fail to reach the markets. Food
processing industry and trade should be more efficient. 100% FDI will be
allowed through FIPB route in marketing of food products produced and
manufactured in India. This will benefit farmers, give impetus to food
processing industry and create vast employment opportunities.
88.
A new policy for management of Government investment in
Public Sector Enterprises, including disinvestment and strategic sale,
has been approved. We have to leverage the assets of CPSEs for generation
of resources for investment in new projects. We will encourage CPSEs to
divest individual assets like land, manufacturing units, etc. to release
their asset value for making investment in new projects. The NITI Aayog
will identify the CPSEs for strategic sale.
89.
We will adopt a comprehensive approach for efficient management
of Government investment in CPSEs by addressing issues such as capital
restructuring, dividend, bonus shares, etc. The Department of
Disinvestment is being re-named as the “Department of Investment and
Public Asset Management (DIPAM)”.
VI.
Financial Sector Reforms
90.
A vibrant financial sector is of critical importance to the growth of
every economy. In my last two Budgets, I had announced several measures
in this regard. I would now like to announce the following initiatives:
(i) A systemic vacuum exists with regard to bankruptcy situations
in financial firms. A comprehensive Code on Resolution of
Financial Firms will be introduced as a Bill in the Parliament
during 2016-17.
This Code will provide a specialised
resolution mechanism to deal with bankruptcy situations in
banks, insurance companies and financial sector entities. This
Code, together with the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code 2015,
when enacted, will provide a comprehensive resolution
mechanism for our economy.
(ii)
The RBI Act 1934, is being amended to provide statutory basis
for a Monetary Policy Framework and a Monetary Policy
Committee through the Finance Bill 2016. A committee-based
approach will add lot of value and transparency to monetary
policy decisions.
(iii) A Financial Data Management Centre under the aegis of the
Financial Stability Development Council (FSDC) will be set up
to facilitate integrated data aggregation and analysis in the
financial sector.
(iv) To improve greater retail participation in Government
securities, RBI will facilitate their participation in the primary
and secondary markets through stock exchanges and access to
NDS-OM trading platform.
(v)
New derivative products will be developed by SEBI in the
Commodity Derivatives market.
(vi) To facilitate deepening of corporate bond market, a number
of measures will be undertaken, details of which are given in
Annex II of the Budget Speech. The enactment of Insolvency
and Bankruptcy Code would provide a major boost to the
development of the corporate bond market.
(vii) To tackle the problem of stressed assets in the banking sector,
Asset Reconstruction Companies (ARCs) have a very important
role. I therefore, propose to make necessary amendments in
the SARFAESI Act 2002 to enable the sponsor of an ARC to
hold up to 100% stake in the ARC and permit non-institutional
investors to invest in Securitization Receipts.
(viii) In the recent past, there have been rising instances of people in
various parts of the country being defrauded by illicit deposit
taking schemes. The worst victims of these schemes are the
poor and the financially illiterate. The operation of such
schemes are often spread over many States. I, therefore,
propose to bring in comprehensive Central legislation in
2016-17 to deal with the menace of such schemes.
(ix) I also propose to amend the SEBI Act 1992 in the coming year
to provide for more members and benches of the Securities
Appellate Tribunal.

91.
As the Honourable Members are well aware, the strength of the
financial sector is dependent upon a strong and well-functioning Banking
system. We already have a comprehensive ‘Plan For Revamping of Public
Sector Banks’, INDRADHANUSH, which is under implementation. We are
now confronted with the problem of stressed assets in Public Sector Banks,
which is a legacy from the past. Several steps have already been taken in
this regard. We are not interfering in lending and personnel matters of the
Banks. Structural issues have been addressed in various sectors like Power,
Coal, Highways, Sugar and Steel. The Banks are putting in special efforts to
effect recoveries, with a focus on reviving stalled projects.
92.
To support the Banks in these efforts as well as to support credit
growth, I have proposed an allocation of ` 25,000 crore in BE 2016-17
towards recapitalisation of Public Sector Banks. If additional capital is
required by these Banks, we will find the resources for doing so. We stand
solidly behind these Banks.
93.
Our Public Sector Banks will have to be strong and competitive.
The Bank Board Bureau will be operationalized during 2016-17 and a
roadmap for consolidation of Public Sector Banks will be spelt out. The
process of transformation of IDBI Bank has already started. Government will
take it forward and also consider the option of reducing its stake to below
50%.
94.
For speedier resolution of stressed assets, the Debt Recovery
Tribunals will be strengthened with focus on improving the existing
infrastructure, including computerised processing of court cases, to support
reduction in the number of hearings and faster disposal of cases.
95.
The Pradhan Mantri Mudra Yojana (PMMY) was launched for the
benefit of bottom of the pyramid entrepreneurs. Banks and NBFC-MFIs
have reported that the amount sanctioned under PMMY had reached about
Rs.One lakh crore to over 2.5 crore borrowers by early February this year. I
propose to increase the target next year to ` 1,80,000 crore.
96.
To provide better access to financial services, especially in rural
areas, we will undertake a massive nationwide rollout of ATMs and Micro
ATMs in Post Offices over the next three years.
97.
Public shareholding in Government-owned companies is a means of
ensuring higher levels of transparency and accountability. To promote this
objective, the general insurance companies owned by the Government will
be listed in the stock exchanges.
VII.
Governance and Ease of Doing Business
98.
Our Government is giving unparalleled emphasis to good governance
with special focus on process reforms, IT-enabled Government processes,
etc.
The whole idea is to remove the irritants for the public in their
interface with Government agencies.
99.
A Task Force has been constituted for rationalisation of human
resources in various Ministries. A comprehensive review and rationalisation
of autonomous bodies is also underway.
100. A critical component of minimum Government and maximum
governance is to ensure targeted disbursement of Government subsidies and
financial assistance to the actual beneficiaries. Public money should reach
the poor and the deserving without any leakage. Three specific initiatives
are proposed to achieve this objective.
First, we will introduce a bill for Targeted Delivery of Financial and
Other Subsidies, Benefits and Services by using the Aadhar
framework. The bill will be introduced in the current Budget Session
of the Parliament. The Aadhar number or authentication shall not,
however, confer any right of citizenship or domicile. A social
security platform will be developed using Aadhar to accurately target
beneficiaries. This will be a transformative piece of legislation which
will benefit the poor and the vulnerable.
Second, we have already introduced Direct Benefit Transfer in LPG.
Based on this successful experience, we propose to introduce DBT on
pilot basis for fertilizer in a few districts across the country, with a
view to improving the quality of service delivery to farmers.
Third, of the 5.35 lakh Fair Price Shops in the country, automation
facilities will be provided in 3 lakh Fair Price Shops by March 2017.

101. We have to bring more transparency and efficiency in Government
procurement of goods and services. The Director General of Supplies and
Disposal (DGS&D) will establish a technology driven platform to facilitate
procurement of goods and services by various Ministries and agencies of the
Government.
102. To remove the difficulties and impediments to ease of doing
business, we will introduce a bill to amend the Companies Act, 2013 in the
current Budget Session of the Parliament. The Bill would also improve the
enabling environment for start-ups. The registration of companies will also
be done in one day.
103. Monitoring of prices of essential commodities is a key element of
good governance. A number of measures have been taken to deal with the
problem of abrupt increase in prices of pulses. Government has approved
creation of buffer stock of pulses through procurement at Minimum Support
Price and at market price through Price Stabilisation Fund. This Fund has
been provided with a corpus of ` 900 crore to support market interventions.
104. Madam Speaker, for good governance, we have to capitalise on the
country’s unity in diversity. To strengthen understanding of each other, it is
proposed to create a closer engagement between different States and Districts
in a structured manner. “Ek Bharat Shreshtha Bharat” programme will be
launched to link States and Districts in an annual programme that
connects people through exchanges in areas of language, trade, culture,
travel and tourism. We will do this through mutual agreement with
participating States and Districts.
105. In 2017, the country will celebrate 70 th Anniversary of our
Independence. We will chalk out milestones for nation’s journey beyond the
70 th Anniversary of Independence. Dr. Toynbee, the historian, had observed
that “a chapter which had a Western beginning will have to have an Indian
ending.....”. My belief is that the year 2017 will unfold the great historian’s
dream. Our scheme of “Ek Bharat Shreshtha Bharat” is part of this vision.
VIII. Fiscal Discipline
106. Let me now elaborate on the fiscal situation in the context of the
Budget for the year 2016-17.
107. While preparing this Budget, I have received conflicting suggestions
about the FRBM roadmap. Different schools of thought have argued either
in favour of fiscal consolidation and stability or for a less aggressive
consolidation and for boosting growth. I have weighed the policy options
and decided that prudence lies in adhering to the fiscal targets.
Consequently, the fiscal deficit in RE 2015-16 and BE 2016-17 have been
retained at 3.9% and 3.5% of GDP respectively. While doing so, I have
ensured that the development agenda has not been compromised.
108. The total expenditure in the Budget for 2016-17 has been projected
at ` 19.78 lakh crore, consisting of ` 5.50 lakh crore under Plan and ` 14.28
lakh crore under Non-Plan. The increase in Plan expenditure is in the order
of 15.3% over current year BE. Plan Allocations have given special
emphasis to sectors like agriculture, irrigation, social sector including health,
women and child development, welfare of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes, minorities, infrastructure, etc. Continuing with the policy of higher
empowering States, the total resources being transferred to States are
` 99,681 crore more over RE 2015-16 and ` 2,46,024 crore more over Actuals
of 2014-15. Details of allocations in certain vital sectors and schemes and
transfers to States are given in Annex III to the Speech.
109. This is the last year of the 12 th Plan. Successive committees have
questioned the merit in having Plan and Non-Plan classification of
Government expenditure. A broad understanding over the years has been
that Plan expenditures are good and Non-Plan expenditures are bad. This
results in skewed allocations in the Budget. We need to correct this and give
greater focus to Revenue and Capital classification of Government
expenditure. We have, therefore, decided that the Plan-Non-Plan
classification will be done away with from fiscal 2017-18. The Finance
Ministry will closely work with the State Finance Departments to align
Central and State Budgets in this matter.
110. To improve the quality of Government expenditure, every new
scheme being sanctioned by Government will have a sunset date and
outcome review. A redeeming feature of this year’s Budget is that we
have improved upon the Revenue Deficit target from 2.8% to 2.5% of GDP
in RE 2015-16.
111. The FRBM Act has been under implementation for more than a
decade. Both Central and State Governments have made significant gains
from the implementation of this Act. There is now a school of thought
which believes that instead of fixed numbers as fiscal deficit targets, it may
be better to have a fiscal deficit range as the target, which would give
necessary policy space to the Government to deal with dynamic situations.
There is also a suggestion that fiscal expansion or contraction should be
aligned with credit contraction or expansion respectively, in the economy.
While remaining committed to fiscal prudence and consolidation, a time has
come to review the working of the FRBM Act, especially in the context of
the uncertainty and volatility which have become the new norms of global
economy. I, therefore, propose to constitute a Committee to review the
implementation of the FRBM Act and give its recommendations on the way
forward.
112. As the Honourable Members are aware, the Seventh Central Pay
Commission has submitted its Report. Following the past practice, a
Committee has been constituted to examine the Report and give its
recommendations. In the meantime, I have made necessary interim
provisions in the Budget.
113. We have rationalised and restructured more than 1500 Central Plan
Schemes into about 300 Central Sector and 30 Centrally Sponsored
Schemes. This will avoid overlapping of expenditure. I reiterate that I
remain committed to the financial requirements arising from economic
packages that have been announced by our Government and also
commitments emanating from reorganisation of States.
114. I have also allocated initial sums of ` 100 crore each for celebrating
the Birth Centenary of Pandit Deen Dayal Upadhyay and the 350 th Birth
Anniversary of Guru Gobind Singh.
IX.
Tax Reforms
115. I now turn to Tax Reforms which is elaborated in Part B of my
Budget Speech.
Madam Speaker,
116.
I shall now present my tax proposals
117. The Government acknowledges the role of taxpayers in nation
building. Each rupee of tax contributes towards the Government’s efforts to
provide better infrastructure, rural revival and social well-being. Taxation is
a major tool available to Government for removing poverty and inequality
from the society. The posterity will not forgive us if we do not use this
opportunity in this perspective.
The thrust of my tax proposals this year falls in nine categories:-
(1) Relief to small tax payers.
(2) Measures to boost growth and employment generation.
(3) Incentivizing domestic value addition to help Make in India.
(4) Measures for moving towards a pensioned society.
(5) Measures for promoting affordable housing.
(6) Additional resource mobilization for agriculture, rural economy
and clean environment.
(7) Reducing litigation and providing certainty in taxation.
(8) Simplification and rationalization of taxation.
(9) Use of Technology for creating accountability.
Relief to small tax payers
118. In order to lessen tax burden on individuals with income not
exceeding ` 5 lakhs, I propose to raise the ceiling of tax rebate under section
87A from ` 2,000 to ` 5,000. There are 2 crore tax payers in this category
who will get a relief of ` 3,000 in their tax liability.
119. The people who do not have any house of their own and also do not
get any house rent allowance from any employer today get a deduction of
` 24,000 per annum from their income to compensate them for the rent they
pay. I propose to increase the limit of deduction in respect of rent paid under
section 80GG from ` 24,000 per annum to ` 60,000 per annum, which should
provide relief to those who live in rented houses.
120. Presumptive taxation scheme under section 44AD of the Income Tax
Act is available for small and medium enterprises i.e non corporate
businesses with turnover or gross receipts not exceeding one crore rupees.
At present about 33 lakh small business people avail of this benefit, which
frees them from the burden of maintaining detailed books of account and
getting audit done. I propose to increase the turnover limit under this scheme
to Rupees two crores which will bring big relief to a large number of
assesses in the MSME category.
121. I also propose to extend the presumptive taxation scheme to
professionals with gross receipts up to ` 50 lakh with the presumption of
profit being 50% of the gross receipts.
Measures to boost growth and employment generation
122. I had, in my last budget speech mooted the proposal to reduce the rate
of Corporate Tax from 30% to 25% over a period, accompanied by
rationalization and removal of various tax exemptions and incentives. In any
case the effective rate of tax paid by companies comes to an average of 24.67
% because of various exemptions which they are availing of. A phasing out
plan of removing these exemptions and tax incentives was placed in public
domain and we have received a large number of constructive suggestions.
The final plan of phasing out exemptions is given in Annexure. The
highlights are as follows:-
(a) The accelerated depreciation provided under IT Act will be
limited to maximum 40% from 1.4.2017.
(b) The benefit of deductions for Research would be limited to
150% from 1.4.2017 and 100% from 1.4.2020.
(c) The benefit of section 10AA to new SEZ units will be available
to those units which commence activity before 31.3.2020.
(d) The weighted deduction under section 35CCD for skill
development will continue up to 1.4.2020.
123. The reduction in corporate tax rate
has to be calibrated with
additional revenue expected from the incentives being phased out. The
benefits from phasing out of exemptions are available to Government only
gradually. In the first phase, therefore, I propose the following two changes
in corporate income-tax rates:-
(a) The new manufacturing companies which are incorporated on
or after 1.3.2016 are proposed to be given an option to be taxed
at 25% + surcharge and cess provided they do not claim profit
linked or investment linked deductions and do not avail of
investment allowance and accelerated depreciation.
(b) I also propose to lower the corporate income tax rate for the
next financial year of relatively small enterprises i.e companies
with turnover not exceeding ` 5 crore (in the financial year
ending March 2015), to 29% plus surcharge and cess.
124. Startups generate employment, bring innovation and are expected to
be key partners in Make in India programme. I propose to assist their
propagation through 100% deduction of profits for 3 out of 5 years for
startups set up during April 2016 to March 2019. MAT will apply in such
cases. Capital gains will not be taxed if invested in regulated/notified Fund
of Funds and by individuals in notified startups, in which they hold majority
shares.
125. Research is the driver of innovation and innovation provides a thrust
to economic growth. I propose a special patent regime with 10% rate of tax
on income from worldwide exploitation of patents developed and registered
in India.
126. In order to get more investment in Asset Reconstruction Companies
(ARCs) which play a very important role in resolution of bad debts, I
propose to provide complete pass through of income-tax to securitization
trusts including trusts of ARCs. The income will be taxed in the hands of the
investors instead of the trust. However, the trust will be liable to deduct tax
at source.
127. The period for getting benefit of long term capital gain regime in case
of unlisted companies is proposed to be reduced from three to two years.
128. Non-banking financial companies shall be eligible for deduction to
the extent of 5% of its income in respect of provision for bad and doubtful
debts.
129. The determination of residency of foreign company on the basis of
Place of Effective Management (POEM) is proposed to be deferred by one
year.
130. I would like to reiterate our commitment to implement General Anti
Avoidance Rules (GAAR) from 1.4.2017.
131. In order to meet with our commitment to BEPS initiative of OECD
and G-20, the Finance Bill, 2016 includes provision for requirement of
country by country reporting for companies with a consolidated revenue of
more than Euro 750 million.
132. I propose to exempt service tax on services provided under Deen
Dayal Upadhyay Grameen Kaushalya Yojana and services provided by
Assessing Bodies empanelled by Ministry of Skill Development &
Entrepreneurship.
133. I propose to exempt service tax on general insurance services
provided under ‘Niramaya’ Health Insurance Scheme launched by National
Trust for the Welfare of Persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental
Retardation and Multiple Disability.
134. To promote use of refrigerated containers, I propose to reduce the
basic custom and excise duty on them to 5% and 6% respectively.
135. A number of assistive devices, rehabilitation aids and other goods for
differently abled (Divyang) persons attract Nil basic customs duty. I propose
to extend this exemption to Braille paper.
Incentivising domestic value addition to help Make in India.
136. Customs and excise duty structure plays an important role in
incentivizing domestic value addition towards Make in India campaign of
our Government. In line with that, I propose to make suitable changes in
customs and excise duty rates on certain inputs, raw materials, intermediaries
and components and certain other goods and simplify procedures, so as to
reduce costs and improve competitiveness of domestic industry in sectors
like Information technology hardware, capital goods, defence production,
textiles, mineral fuels & mineral oils, chemicals & petrochemicals, paper,
paperboard & newsprint, Maintenance repair and overhauling [MRO] of
aircrafts and ship repair etc. Details of such changes are given in the
Annexure to Budget Speech.
Measures for moving towards a pensioned society
137. Pension schemes offer financial protection to senior citizens. I
believe that the tax treatment should be uniform for defined benefit and
defined contribution pension plans. I propose to make withdrawal up to 40%
of the corpus at the time of retirement tax exempt in the case of National
Pension Scheme.
138. In case of superannuation funds and recognized provident funds,
including EPF, the same norm of 40% of corpus to be tax free will apply in
respect of corpus created out of contributions made after 1.4.2016.
139. Further, the annuity fund which goes to the legal heir after the death
of pensioner will not be taxable in all three cases. Also, we are proposing a
monetary limit for contribution of employer in recognized Provident and
Superannuation Fund of ` 1.5 lakh per annum for taking tax benefit.
140. I propose to exempt from service tax the Annuity services provided
by the National Pension System (NPS) and Services provided by EPFO to
employees.
141. I also propose to reduce service tax on Single premium Annuity
(Insurance) Policies from 3.5% to 1.4% of the premium paid in certain cases.
Measures for promoting affordable housing
142. Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojna embodies the assurance of the
Government to address the housing needs of all and more specifically the
poor, in a time bound manner. Construction of houses creates considerable
employment opportunities as well. In order to fuel activity in the housing
sector, I propose to give 100% deduction for profits to an undertaking from a
housing project for flats upto 30 sq. metres in four metro cities and 60 sq.
metres in other cities, approved during June 2016 to March 2019, and is
completed within three years of the approval. Minimum Alternate Tax will,
however, apply to these undertakings.
143. For the ‘first – home buyers’, I propose to give deduction for
additional interest of ` 50,000 per annum for loans up to ` 35 lakh sanctioned
during the next financial year, provided the value of the house does not
exceed ` 50 lakh.
144. Another proposal to stimulate housing activity is to facilitate
investments in Real Estate Investment Trusts. I propose that any distribution
made out of income of SPV to the REITs and INVITs having specified
shareholding will not be subjected to Dividend Distribution Tax.
145. It is proposed to exempt service tax on construction of affordable
houses up to 60 square metres under any scheme of the Central or State
Government including PPP Schemes.
146. I also propose to extend excise duty exemption, presently available to
Concrete Mix manufactured at site for use in construction work at such site
to Ready Mix Concrete.
Additional resource mobilization for agriculture, rural economy and
clean environment
147. Dividend Distribution Tax (DDT) uniformly applies to all investors
irrespective of their income slabs. This is perceived to distort the fairness and
progressive nature of taxes. Persons with relatively higher income can bear a
higher tax cost. I, therefore, propose that in addition to DDT paid by the
companies, tax at the rate of 10% of gross amount of dividend will be
payable by the recipients, that is, individuals, HUFs and firms receiving
dividend in excess of ` 10 lakh per annum.
148. I also propose to raise the surcharge from 12% to 15% on persons,
other than companies, firms and cooperative societies having income above
` 1 crore.
149. I also propose to collect tax at source at the rate of 1% on purchase of
luxury cars exceeding value of Rs.ten lakh and purchase of goods and
services in cash exceeding Rs.two lakh. For compliant tax payers with
resources, this levy not only advances collection of tax when the expenditure
is incurred, but it provides data to the tax authorities to identify the persons
who incur such expenditure, but may be missing from the tax base. Farmers
and notified class of persons will have an option of giving a form by which
TCS will not be charged.
150. Rate of Securities Transaction tax in case of ‘Options’ is proposed to
be increased from .017% to .05%.
151. In order to tap tax on income accruing to foreign e-commerce
companies from India, it is proposed that a person making payment to a non-
resident, who does not have a permanent establishment, exceeding in
aggregate ` 1 lakh in a year, as consideration for online advertisement, will
withhold tax at 6% of gross amount paid, as Equalization levy. The levy will
only apply to B2B transactions.
152. I propose to impose a Cess, called the Krishi Kalyan Cess, @ 0.5%
on all taxable services, proceeds of which would be exclusively used for
financing initiatives relating to improvement of agriculture and welfare of
farmers. The Cess will come into force with effect from 1st June 2016. Input
Tax credit of this cess will be available for payment of this cess.
153. The pollution and traffic situation in Indian cities is a matter of
concern. I propose to levy an infrastructure cess, of 1% on small petrol,
LPG, CNG cars, 2.5% on diesel cars of certain capacity and 4% on other
higher engine capacity vehicles and SUVs.
154. I also propose to impose an excise duty of ‘1% without input tax
credit or 12.5% with input tax credit’ on articles of jewellery [excluding
silver jewellery, other than studded with diamonds and some other precious
stones], with a higher exemption and eligibility limits of ` 6 crores and ` 12
crores respectively. Necessary steps will also be taken to enable the new
taxpayers to comply with this levy without any difficulty.
155. I propose to change the excise duty on branded readymade garments
and made up articles of textiles with a retail sale price of ` 1,000 and above
from ‘Nil without input tax credit or 6%/12.5% with input tax credit’ to ‘2%
without input tax credit or 12.5% with input tax credit’.
156. I propose to rename the ‘Clean Energy Cess’ levied on coal, lignite
and peat as ‘Clean Environment Cess’ and simultaneously increase its rate
from ` 200 per tonne to ` 400 per tonne.
157. To discourage consumption of tobacco and tobacco products, I
propose to increase the excise duties on various tobacco products other than
beedi by about 10 to 15%.
158. I propose to amend the Finance Act, 1994 so as to declare assignment
by the Government of the right to use the radio-frequency spectrum and its
subsequent transfers a service, to make it clear that assignment of right to use
the spectrum is a service leviable to service tax and not sale of intangible
goods.
Reducing litigation and providing certainty in taxation
159. We are moving towards a lower tax regime with non-litigious
approach. Thus, while compliant taxpayers can expect a supportive interface
with the department, tax evasion will be countered strongly. Capability of
the tax department to detect tax evasion has improved because of enhanced
access to information and availability of technology driven analytical tools
to process such information. I want to give an opportunity to the earlier non-
compliant to move to the category of compliant.
160. I propose a limited period Compliance Window for domestic
taxpayers to declare undisclosed income or income represented in the form
of any asset and clear up their past tax transgressions by paying tax at 30%,
and surcharge at 7.5% and penalty at 7.5%, which is a total of 45% of the
undisclosed income. There will be no scrutiny or enquiry regarding income
declared in these declarations under the Income Tax Act or the Wealth Tax
Act and the declarants will have immunity from prosecution. Immunity from
Benami Transaction (Prohibition) Act, 1988 is also proposed subject to
certain conditions. The surcharge levied at 7.5% of undisclosed income will
be called Krishi Kalyan surcharge to be used for agriculture and rural
economy. We plan to open the window under this Income Disclosure
Scheme from 1 st June to 30 th September, 2016 with an option to pay amount
due within two months of declaration.
161. Our Government is fully committed to remove black money from the
economy. Having given one opportunity for evaded income to be declared
once, we would then like to focus all our resources for bringing people with
black money to books.
162. Litigation is a scourge for a tax friendly regime and creates an
environment of distrust in addition to increasing the compliance cost of the
tax payers and administrative cost for the Government. There are about 3
lakh tax cases pending with the 1 st Appellate Authority with disputed amount
being 5.5 lakh crores. In order to reduce this number, I propose a new
Dispute Resolution Scheme (DRS).
163. A taxpayer who has an appeal pending as of today before the
Commissioner (Appeals) can settle his case by paying the disputed tax and
interest up to the date of assessment. No penalty in respect of Income-tax
cases with disputed tax up to ` 10 lakh will be levied. Cases with disputed
tax exceeding ` 10 lakh will be subjected to only 25% of the minimum of the
imposable penalty for both direct and indirect taxes. Any pending appeal
against a penalty order can also be settled by paying 25% of the minimum of
the imposable penalty. Certain categories of persons including those who are
charged with criminal offences under specific Acts are proposed to be barred
from availing this scheme.
164. I had in my Budget speech of July, 2014 assured that this
Government would not retrospectively create a fresh tax liability. I had also
hoped then that the cases pending in various courts and other legal fora
relating to certain retrospective amendments undertaken to the Income-tax
Act, 1961, through the Finance Act, 2012 will soon reach their logical
conclusion. I would like to reiterate that we are committed to provide a
stable and predictable taxation regime. We will not resort to such
amendments in future. I had also announced constitution of a High Level
Committee which would oversee any fresh case where the assessing officer
proposes to assess or reassess the income in respect of indirect transfers by
applying the retrospective amendment. In order to allay any fears of tax
adventurism, this Committee will now be chaired by the Revenue Secretary
and consist of Chairman, CBDT and an expert from outside. This
Committee will effectively oversee the implementation of the assurances.
165. In order to give an opportunity to the past cases which are ongoing
under the retrospective amendment, I propose a one-time scheme of Dispute
Resolution for them, in which, subject to their agreeing to withdraw any
pending case lying in any Court or Tribunal or any proceeding for
arbitration, mediation etc. under BIPA, they can settle the case by paying
only the tax arrears in which case liability of the interest and penalty shall be
waived.
166. Levy of heavy penalty for concealment of income has over the years
resulted in large number of disputes despite a number of decisions of the
Apex court on interpretation of statutory provisions and principles guiding
imposition of penalty. At present the Income-tax Officer has discretion to
levy penalty at the rate of 100% to 300% of tax sought to be evaded. I
propose to modify the entire scheme of penalty by providing different
categories of misdemeanor with graded penalty and thereby substantially
reducing the discretionary power of the tax officers. The penalty rates will
now be 50% of tax in case of underreporting of income and 200% of tax
where there is misreporting of facts. Remission of penalty is also proposed
in certain circumstances where taxes are paid and appeal is not filed.
167. Another issue which has led to considerable number of disputes is
quantification of disallowance of expenditure relatable to exempt income in
terms of Section 14A of the Income Tax Act. I propose to rationalize the
formula in Rule 8D governing such quantification. The said Rule is being
amended to provide that disallowance will be limited to 1% of the average
monthly value of investments yielding exempt income, but not exceeding the
actual expenditure claimed.
168. As another tax payer friendly measure, I propose to provide a time
limit of one year for disposing petitions of the tax payers seeking waiver of
interest and penalty.
169. The Income-tax Department is also issuing instruction making it
mandatory for the assessing officer to grant stay of demand once the assesse
pays 15% of the disputed demand, while the appeal is pending before
Commissioner of Income-tax (Appeals). In case of deviation, assessing
officer has to get orders of his superiors. The tax payer also has an option to
go to superior officer in case he does not agree with conditions of stay order
passed by the subordinate officer.
170. In order to remove backlog of cases we are creating 11 new benches
of Customs, Excise and Service Tax Appellate Tribunal (CESTAT).
171. The monetary limit for deciding an appeal by a single member Bench
of ITAT is proposed to be enhanced from ` 15 lakhs to ` 50 lakhs.
172. I also propose to amend the CENVAT Credit Rules, 2004, so as to
improve credit flow, reduce the compliance burden and associated litigation,
particularly those relating to apportionment of credit between exempted and
non exempted final products/services. The amendments in these rules will
also enable manufacturers with multiple manufacturing units to maintain a
common warehouse for inputs and distribute inputs with credits to the
individual manufacturing units.
Simplification and rationalization of taxation
173. The Government has already accepted many recommendations of
Tax Administration Reform Committee and I propose to accept a number of
recommendations of Justice Easwar Committee in this Budget.
174. To reduce multiplicity of taxes, associated cascading and to reduce
cost of collection, I propose to abolish 13 cesses, levied by various Ministries
in which revenue collection is less than ` 50 crore in a year.
175. To improve the cash flow position of small tax payers who get their
funds blocked due to current TDS provision, I propose to rationalize TDS
provisions for Income Tax as per Annexure.
176. Non-residents without PAN are currently subjected to a higher rate of
TDS. It is proposed to amend the relevant provision to provide that on
furnishing of alternative documents, the higher rate will not apply.
177. The facility for revision of return, hitherto available to a service tax
assessee only, is being extended to Central Excise assessees also.
178. I propose to provide additional options to banking companies and
financial institutions, including non-banking financial companies, for
reversal of input tax credits with respect to non-taxable services provided by
them by way of extending deposits, loans and advances.
179. Our Government has taken a number of steps to reduce the cargo
release time and the transaction costs of EXIM trade. I propose to amend the
Customs Act to provide for deferred payment of customs duties for importers
and exporters with proven track record.
180. In 2014-15 Budget, I had announced the intent to implement Indian
Customs Single Window Project. We have made significant progress in this
and it would be implemented at major ports and airports starting from
beginning of next financial year.
181. The customs Baggage Rules for international passengers are being
simplified so as to increase the free baggage allowance. The filing of
baggage declaration will be required only for those passengers who carry
dutiable goods.
Use of Technology for creating accountability
182. Technology is a boon for mankind. We plan to use technology in
taxation Department in a big way to make life simpler for a law abiding
citizen, and also for data mining to track tax evaders.
183. A pilot was run in 2015-16 for e-assessment to obviate the
requirement for tax payers to visit the Income-tax offices. I propose to
expand the scope of e-assessments to all assessees in 7 mega cities in the
coming years. The cases selected for scrutiny will be scrutinized in
e-environment whereby unless the assessee himself wants to be heard, or for
special reasons to be recorded, the assessing officer wants to hear the party,
there will be no face to face contact of IT Department with assessee.
184. Income-tax Department (ITD) will fully expand the pilot initiative of
‘e-Sahyog’ with a view to reduce compliance cost, especially for small
taxpayers. The objective of the ‘e-Sahyog’ pilot project is to provide an
online mechanism to resolve mismatches in Income-tax returns without
requiring taxpayers to attend the Income-tax office.
185. I propose that in matters pertaining to Income-tax Act, Government
will pay interest at the rate of 9% p.a against normal rate of 6% p.a in case
there is delay in giving effect to Appellate order beyond ninety days. The
officers who delay it, will be accountable for this loss to Government.
186. I also propose to change the procedure to provide for a shift from
physical control to record based control for customs bonded warehouses,
supported by sophisticated IT systems.
187. Madam Speaker, my direct tax proposals would result in revenue loss
of ` 1,060 crore and my indirect proposals are expected to yield ` 20,670
crores. Thus the net impact of all tax proposals would be revenue gain of
` 19,610 crores.
CONCLUSION
Madam Speaker,
188. This Budget is being presented amidst global and domestic
headwinds. There are several challenges. We see them as opportunities. I
have outlined the agenda of our Government to ‘Transform India’ for the
benefit of the farmers, the poor and the vulnerable.
189. Madam Speaker, it is said that “Champions are made from something
they have deep inside of them - a desire, a dream, a vision”. We have a
desire to provide socio-economic security to every Indian, especially the
farmers, the poor and the vulnerable; we have a dream to see a more
prosperous India; and a vision to ‘Transform India’.
190. With these words, Madam Speaker, I commend the Budget to the
House.
